INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES
AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION
MARC LACKENBY
Abstract. We present a new algorithm to determine whether a compact
orientable surface properly embedded in a compact orientable 3-manifold is
incompressible. As a special case, this provides a new algorithm to detect the
unknot. The central technique is the use of hierarchies. Unlike previous algo-
rithms, no challenging invariants need to be computed and no lengthy search
procedures are required. This algorithm leads to a new proof that determin-
ing whether a compact orientable 3-manifold has incompressible boundary is
in NP.
Contents
1. Introduction 1
2. Hierarchies and boundary patterns 4
3. Essential hierarchies 8
4. Handle structures and normal surfaces 12
5. Decomposing a handle structure along a normal surface 16
6. The algorithm to decide whether a pattern is essential 23
7. An example 30
8. The algorithm to determine incompressibility 31
9. The number of steps 34
10. A reﬁned algorithm using interior parallelity bundles 35
11. Handle structures of uniform type 38
12. Fundamental decomposing surfaces 43
13. Certifying an inessential pattern 45
14. Certifying an essential hierarchy 49
References 54
1. Introduction
Incompressible orientable surfaces occupy a central position in 3-manifold the-
ory. It is therefore very natural to ask whether a given orientable surface properly
embedded in a 3-manifold is incompressible. The following result provides an algo-
rithm to determine this.
Theorem 1.1. LetT be a triangulation of a compact orientable irreducible 3-
manifold M, possibly with boundary. Let S be a compact orientable normal surface
properly embedded in M. Then there is an algorithm to determine whether S is
incompressible.
1
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 2
This theorem is not new, but the algorithm is. The ﬁrst algorithmic solution
to the problem in Theorem 1.1 was given by Haken [3]. His procedure was to cut
the manifold M alongS and then triangulate the new 3-manifold M\\S. Then he
searched for possible normal compression discs for the two copies of S in M\\S.
In order to make this a ﬁnite procedure, he showed that it was possible to restrict
to ‘fundamental’ normal discs. A more recent algorithm, due to the author [16],
is more complicated, and uses sutured manifold hierarchies. Both these algorithms
are useful and have interesting theoretical consequences. But they both have the
downside that they require a search through a possibly very extensive search space,
for example, the set of all fundamental normal surfaces. The algorithm presented
here has the signiﬁcant advantage that it does not require examination of a large
search space. An interesting application of Theorem 1.1 is the following.
Corollary 1.2. There is an algorithm to determine whether a given knot in the
3-sphere is trivial.
This follows from Theorem 1.1 because the exterior of a knot in the 3-sphere has
incompressible boundary if and only if the knot is non-trivial. Again, this result is
not new. There are now many known algorithms to detect the unknot, the ﬁrst of
which was due to Haken [3]. Some require the computation of knot invariants, such
as Khovanov homology [10] or Heegaard Floer homology [19, 20]. Others require a
possibly extensive search: a search for a spanning disc [5, 16], a homomorphism from
the fundamental group of the knot complement to a ﬁnite group with non-abelian
image [11], sequences of Reidemeister moves [15] or sequences of grid diagrams [2].
As a result, none of these algorithms are likely to run in polynomial time. Indeed,
in the case of Khovanov homology, there is an exponential lower bound on its worst-
case running time [7], subject to some standard conjectures in complexity theory.
The algorithm that we give seems amenable to possible speed-up, which we will
explore in future work. Furthermore, in a companion paper [17], we will show how
this algorithm can be extended to determine whether a given link in the 3-sphere
is hyperbolic.
The algorithm generalises to 3-manifolds with a boundary pattern. Recall that
a boundary pattern for a compact orientable 3-manifold M is a collection P of
disjoint simple closed curves and trivalent graphs embedded in ∂M . A boundary
pattern P is essential if, for every disc D properly embedded in M that intersects
P transversely in at most three points away from the vertices of P , there is a
disc D′ in ∂M that intersects P in the empty set, a single arc, or a graph with a
single 3-valent vertex in the interior of D′ and three 1-valent vertices on ∂D′. (See
Figure 1.) If there is a disc D properly embedded in M intersectingP transversely
at most three times away from the vertices, but there is no corresponding disc D′,
thenD is termed a violating disc. In the ﬁnal case, when D′ intersectsP in a graph
with a single 3-valent vertex in the interior ofD′ and three 1-valent vertices on∂D′,
this graph is known as a tripod. Boundary patterns will be the focus of this paper.
At this stage, we observe that when P is the empty pattern, then P is essential if
and only if ∂M is incompressible.
Theorem 1.3. Let (M,P ) be a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold with
boundary pattern. Let T be a triangulation of M in which P is simplicial. Then
there is an algorithm to determine whether P is essential. Moreover, if P is not
essential, the algorithm provides a violating disc.
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 3
Forbidden
Figure 1. Essential boundary pattern
When P is essential and M irreducible, the algorithm outputs an essential hi-
erarchy for (M,P ). Such hierarchies, which are deﬁned in Section 2, will play a
central role in this paper. They are a ﬁnite sequence of decompositions along prop-
erly embedded orientable surfaces where the ﬁnal manifold is a collection of 3-balls
with an essential boundary pattern.
In the later parts of the paper, we will establish that the algorithms given above
can be used to show that the decision problems are in NP. Moreover, we will drop
the hypothesis that the 3-manifold is irreducible. Speciﬁcally, we will consider the
following problems.
The decision problem Incompressible boundary takes, as its input a trian-
gulation of a compact orientable 3-manifold M and it asks whether ∂M is incom-
pressible.
Theorem 1.4. The decision problem Incompressible boundary is in NP.
This theorem was proved by the author in [16], using sutured manifold hierar-
chies, based on argument of Agol. The problem was also shown to be in co-NP by
Ivanov [6].
This has applications for the famous problem Knottedness. This takes, as its
input, either a diagram of a knot K or a triangulation of its exterior, and it asks
whether K is a non-trivial knot.
Corollary 1.5. The decision problem Knottedness is in NP.
This was one of the main theorems in [16]. Previously, Kuperberg [11] showed
that Knottedness is in NP, conditionally on the Generalised Riemann Hypothesis.
The decision problem Essential boundary pattern takes, as its input, a
triangulation of compact orientable 3-manifold M with boundary pattern P that
is simplicial, and it asks whether P is essential. The following is a new result.
Theorem 1.6. The decision problem Essential boundary pattern is in NP
and co-NP.
WhenP is inessential, the certiﬁcate is a violating disc in normal form. When P
is essential andM is irreducible, the certiﬁcate is an essential hierarchy for (M,P ).
The fact that essential hierarchies can be encoded eﬃciently and can be certiﬁed
as essential will be extremely useful in future work [17].
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 4
Much of the theory of hierarchies as explained in Section 2 is due to Johannson
[8]. The presentation here follows that of a graduate course [12] given by the
author in 1999. One of the goals of that course was to provide a new proof of
the loop theorem using hierarchies. The fact that the theory also has algorithmic
applications was observed in a conversation with Ian Agol in 2013. The author
developed and expanded the theory over the intervening years, resulting in this
paper and its sequel [17].
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we recall some basic
material on hierarchies and boundary patterns. In Section 3, we explore essential
hierarchies and prove one direction of Theorem 2.5, which asserts that when a
3-manifold admits an essential hierarchy, then it is irreducible and has essential
boundary pattern. In Section 4, we introduce normal surfaces, in the context of
handle structures with a boundary pattern. In Section 5, we examine how handle
structures behave when decomposed along a normal surface. The goal here is to
establish an upper bound on the number of decompositions in a hierarchy. This
gives the other direction of Theorem 2.5, which gives a suﬃcient condition for a
3-manifold with boundary pattern to admits an essential hierarchy. In Section 6, we
present the algorithm required by Theorem 1.3, and in Section 7, an implementation
of the algorithm in a speciﬁc example is given. The algorithm to determine whether
a surface is incompressible, as required by Theorem 1.1, is given in Section 8.
A crude analysis of the number of steps in the algorithm is given in Section 9.
The crucial quantity that controls an upper bound on the running time is the
number of decompositions in the hierarchy. Therefore, in Section 10, we give a
more complicated algorithm for constructing a hierarchy, that has the advantage
that the number of decompositions is explicitly controlled. In Section 11, we show
that the handle structures created in the hierarchy have uniform type, which means
that each handle meets the pattern and its neighbouring handles in one of ﬁnitely
many types, independent of the manifold. This is important for the later parts of
the paper, in Sections 12, 13 and 14, where we show that the decision problem in
Theorem 1.6, deciding whether a pattern is essential, is in NP and co-NP.
Remark 1.7. The author was partially supported by EPSRC grant EP/Y004256/1.
For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright
licence to any author accepted manuscript arising from this submission.
2. Hierarchies and boundary patterns
We will use the following terminology, which has become standard.
Deﬁnition 2.1. Let M be a manifold and let S be either a codimension one
submanifold properly embedded in M or a compact codimension zero submanifold.
Then the manifold M\\S obtained by cutting M alongS is deﬁned as follows. Pick
a Riemannian metric on M. Then M−S inherits a Riemannian metric and M\\S
is the deﬁned to be metric completion of M−S. We also permit S not to be a
subset of M as long as S and M are both subsets of some larger space and S∩M
satisﬁes the above conditions, in which case M\\S is deﬁned to be M\\(S∩M).
When M is compact and S is a codimension one submanifold, then the inclusion
M−S→M induces a quotient map M\\S→M.
Our algorithm makes use of hierarchies. Here, one starts with a compact ori-
entable 3-manifold, and then one cuts along a properly embedded orientable surface,
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 5
forming a new 3-manifold. In this manifold, one ﬁnds another properly embedded
orientable surface, and one cuts along this. The process continues until the ﬁnal
manifold is a collection of 3-balls. The manifolds in the hierarchy will inherit a
boundary pattern, as follows.
Deﬁnition 2.2. Let (M,P ) be a compact orientable 3-manifold with boundary
pattern. Then a compact orientable surfaceS properly embedded inM is transverse
to P if it is disjoint from the vertices and intersects the edges transversely. We
then say thatS is a decomposing surface. The manifold M\\S inherits a boundary
patternP′, whereP′ is the union of P∩(M\\S) and the copies of ∂S in∂(M\\S).
We write
(M,P )
S
− →(M\\S,P′)
for this decomposition. We also denote ( M\\S,P′) by (M,P )\\S. (See Figure 2.)
 M M \\ S
S
P P'
Figure 2. Decomposing (M,P ) along a surface S
Deﬁnition 2.3. Let (M,P ) be a compact orientable 3-manifold with boundary
pattern. Then a partial hierarchy for (M,P ) is a sequence of decompositions
(M,P ) = (M1,P 1)
S1
−→(M2,P 2)
S2
−→...
Sℓ
−→(Mℓ+1,P ℓ+1).
It is a hierarchy if Mℓ+1 is a disjoint union of 3-balls.
This is a modiﬁcation of the standard terminology, since we do not require the
surfaces to be incompressible (although they will end up being so in the cases of
interest to us).
Recall, from Section 1, the deﬁnition of an essential boundary pattern. At ﬁrst
sight, this is a strange deﬁnition, because it is not at all clear why one should be
interested only in simple closed curves that intersect the pattern in at most three
points. We will give more motivation for it in the results that follow.
Deﬁnition 2.4. An essential hierarchy for a compact orientable 3-manifold M
with boundary pattern P is a sequence of decompositions
(M,P ) = (M1,P 1)
S1
−→(M2,P 2)
S2
−→...
Sℓ
−→(Mℓ+1,P ℓ+1).
where (Mℓ+1,P ℓ+1) is a collection of balls with essential boundary pattern.
Again, it is not immediately clear why one should only be concerned with whether
the ﬁnal pattern is essential. But this is explained by the following result.
Theorem 2.5 (Essential hierarchy iﬀ essential pattern and irreducible). LetM be
a compact orientable 3-manifold with a boundary pattern P . Then (M,P ) admits
an essential hierarchy if and only if the following all hold:
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 6
(1) either M contains a properly embedded orientable incompressible surface
with no 2-sphere components, or ∂M is non-empty;
(2) P is essential;
(3) M is irreducible.
It is relatively straightforward to determine quickly whether a boundary pattern
for a 3-ball is essential. This can be rephrased in standard graph-theoretic terms
as follows. Recall that a graph is simple if it has no edge loops and does not have
multiple edges between pairs of vertices. A simple graph is n-connected for some
positive integern if it has at least n + 1 vertices and there is no set ofn− 1 vertices
whose removal disconnects the graph.
Proposition 2.6 (Essential pattern for a ball) . LetM be a 3-ball, and let P be a
boundary pattern for M. Then P is essential if and only if P is empty, a simple
closed curve or a connected graph, and in the latter case, the planar graph dual to
P is either a simple 4-connected graph or the complete graph on 3 or 4 vertices.
Proof. We ﬁrst show that the given conditions on P imply that P is essential. If
P is empty or a simple closed curve, then clearly P is essential. So suppose that
P is a connected graph and that the graph G dual to P is simple and 4-connected
or the complete graph on 4 vertices. Consider a simple closed curve C in ∂M that
intersectsP transversely in at most 3 points. If C is disjoint from P , then it must
bound a disc in ∂M disjoint from P , since P is connected and ∂M is a sphere.
If C intersects P at one point, this speciﬁes an edge loop in G, contrary to our
assumption thatG is simple. If C intersectsP at two points, then these two points
must lie on the same edge ofP , as otherwise we obtain two edges between the same
pair of vertices of G. Hence, C bounds a disc in ∂M intersecting P in an arc. If
C intersects P at three points, then this speciﬁes a closed walk of length 3 in G.
This is a cycle because otherwise G is not simple. Removing the vertices in this
cycle does not separate G, because G is 4-connected or the complete graph on 3 or
4 vertices. Hence, C must bound a disc intersecting no regions of ∂M−P other
than the three that C visits. This implies that P intersects this disc in a tripod.
Thus we have shown that P is essential.
Conversely, suppose that P is essential. We may suppose that P is non-empty
and not a simple closed curve, as the implication is immediate in those cases. Then
P is clearly connected as otherwise there is a simple closed curve in ∂M−P that
does not bound a disc in ∂M disjoint from P . Let G be its dual planar graph.
An edge loop in G would give a simple closed curve intersecting the pattern once,
contradicting the assumption that P is essential. More than one edge between a
pair of vertices would give a simple closed curve in ∂M intersecting P in exactly
two points that lie in diﬀerent edges of P . Again this contradicts the assumption
that P is essential. Consider a collection of at most three vertices in G. We will
show that these do not separateG. Each vertex corresponds to a region of ∂M−P ,
and for these vertices to disconnect G, the union of these regions must disconnect
∂M . If they do then there must be a simple closed curve lying in the union of these
regions that separates at least two other regions of ∂M−P . Since P is essential,
this curve bounds a disc in ∂M intersecting P in an arc or a tripod. This implies
that these three vertices did not in fact separateG. Note that removing these three
vertices ofG may create the empty graph, but in this case,G is the complete graph
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 7
on 3 vertices. Hence, we have shown that G is 4-connected or the complete graph
on 3 or 4 vertices. □
Note that it can be determined in polynomial time (as a function of the number
of vertices and edges) whether a graph is simple and 4-connected or the complete
graph on 4 vertices.
Theorem 2.5 is an extremely powerful tool for showing that a pattern is essential,
as the following example demonstrates.
Example 2.7. The knot 5 2 is shown in Figure 3. Let M be its exterior and let P
be the empty pattern. A hierarchy for ( M,P ) is given. The ﬁnal manifold consists
of two 3-balls, and the boundary pattern of one of them is shown. It is easy to
check that this pattern is essential, and hence by Theorem 2.5, ( M,P ) is essential
and so the knot 5 2 is not the unknot.
(i) The knot 5 (ii) The first surface in the hierarchy
(iii) The exterior of this surface (iv) The second surface in the hierarchy
2
(v) The pattern of one of the balls (vi) A simplified copy of the pattern
Figure 3. An essential hierarchy
Theorem 2.5 is not new. It is implicit in work of Johannson [8] and a version
of it was used by author in lecture notes in 1999 [12]. However, because it is so
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 8
central to our work and because we will need details of the argument later in the
paper, we give a full proof.
3. Essential hierarchies
Our aim is to prove Theorem 2.5. We ﬁrst show that if (M,P ) admits an essential
hierarchy, thenP is essential and M is irreducible. We will also establish that the
decomposing surfaces have the following important property.
Deﬁnition 3.1. LetM be a compact orientable 3-manifold and letP be a boundary
pattern. Let S be a compact surface properly embedded in M. Then a pattern-
compression disc for S is a disc D embedded in M such that
(1) D∩S is an arc α in ∂D;
(2) ∂D\\α =D∩∂M intersectsP at most once; and
(3) α does not separate oﬀ a disc from S intersectingP at most once.
If no such pattern-compression disc exists, then S is pattern-incompressible. (See
Figure 4.) If D is a pattern-compression disc for S, then the surface obtained from
S by cutting along S∩D and then attaching two parallel copies of D is the surface
obtained by pattern-compressing along D.
S S
�M
D
P
S S
�M
D
Figure 4. A pattern-incompressible surface. (For the sake of clar-
ity, we have assumed here thatM is irreducible andP is essential.)
A key step in the proof of Theorem 2.5 is the following.
Lemma 3.2 (Essential pattern pulls back). Let
(M,P )
S
− →(M′,P′)
be a decomposition and suppose that P′ is essential. Then P is essential and S is
incompressible and pattern-incompressible.
Proof. We ﬁrst show that P is essential. Let D be a disc properly embedded in M
that is transverse to P and that intersectsP at most three times. We wish to show
that D is not a violating disc.
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 9
Perform a small isotopy to S, leaving P invariant, so that afterwards S∩D is a
collection of simple closed curves and arcs properly embedded in D.
If there is a simple closed curve of S∩D, there is one that is innermost in D.
It bounds a disc D′ in M′ that is disjoint from P′. Since we are assuming that P′
is essential, ∂D′ bounds a disc D′′ in ∂M′ that is disjoint from the pattern. This
disc is a subset of S. We can remove D′ from D and replace it by a parallel copy
of D′′. The result is violating for P if and only if D was violating. However, its
intersection with S contains fewer simple closed curves.
So, we may assume that D∩S is a collection of arcs properly embedded in D.
Say there are n> 0 of them. Then at the endpoints of these arcs, we see 4 n points
of intersection with P′. We also have at most 3 points of intersection between
∂D and P . So, in the n + 1 discs D\\(D∩S), there are at most 4 n + 3 points
of intersection with P′. Hence, one these discs, D1 say, has at most three points
of intersection with P′ in its boundary. Necessarily, it has at least two points of
intersection with P′. We are assuming that P′ is essential. Hence, ∂D1 bounds
a disc D2 in ∂M′. This disc D2 intersects P′ either in a single arc or a tripod.
Therefore, D2∩S is a disc. We may remove D1 from D and replace it by D2∩S,
and then perform a further small isotopy to give a disc D3 properly embedded in
M that is transverse to P and that has fewer components of intersection with S.
This is a violating disc for M if and only if D was.
So we may assume that D is disjoint from S and hence lies in M′. Since P′ is
essential,∂D bounds a disc D′ in∂M′ intersectingP′ in the empty set, an arc or a
tripod. Since ∂D′ is disjoint from S, all of D′ must be disjoint from S. So, D′ lies
in ∂M . So, D was not a violating disc, and so we have proved that P is essential.
We now show that S is incompressible. Consider a disc D embedded in the
interior of M such that D∩S = ∂D. Then D is properly embedded in M′ and
is disjoint from the pattern P′. Since P′ is essential, ∂D bounds a disc in ∂M′
disjoint from P′. This is a disc in S. So D is not a compression disc for S.
We now show that S is pattern-incompressible. Let D be a disc embedded in
M such that D∩S is an arc in ∂D, and the remainder of ∂D is an arc in ∂M
intersectingP at most once. Then D lies inM′ and intersectsP′ at least twice and
at most three times. Since P′ is essential,∂D bounds a disc D′ in∂M′ intersecting
P′ in an arc or a tripod. The intersection between D′ and S is a disc separated
oﬀ by D∩S that intersects P at most once. So D is not a pattern-compression
disc. □
Lemma 3.3 (Irreducible and essential pattern pulls back) . Let
(M,P )
S
− →(M′,P′)
be a decomposition and suppose that M′ is irreducible and P′ is essential. Then M
is irreducible and P is essential.
Proof. The fact that P is essential is a result of Lemma 3.2. We need to show that
M is irreducible. Consider a 2-sphere S2 properly embedded in M. This intersects
S in a collection of simple closed curves. An innermost one bounds a disc D′ in
M′ that is disjoint from P′. Since P′ is essential, ∂D′ bounds a disc D′′ in S and
becauseM′ is irreducible, we may isotopeD′′ across toD′ and then a little further,
to remove this curve of S2∩S. So we may assume that S is disjoint from S2, and
hence S2 lies in M′. As M′ is irreducible, S2 bounds a ball in M′ and this is also
a ball in M. □
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 10
In many circumstances, it is also the case that when P is essential and M is
irreducible, then P′ is also essential and M′ is also irreducible. However, in order
to guarantee this, we require that the decomposing surface S is incompressible and
pattern-incompressible. We now investigate how to arrange this.
When we pattern-compress a surface, we would like to say that the new surface
is, in some sense, simpler than the original one. We formalise this as follows, using
the following measure of complexity.
Deﬁnition 3.4. The pattern-complexity χp(S) of a properly embedded surface S
is deﬁned to be −4χ(S) +|S∩P|.
A useful feature of pattern-complexity is the following immediate result.
Lemma 3.5. If S is a compact connected orientable surface satisfying χp(S)< 0,
then S is a sphere or disc intersecting the pattern in at most three points.
Lemma 3.6 (Pattern-compression simpliﬁes). Let S be a properly embedded con-
nected orientable surface that is non-separating. Let S′ be obtained from S by
pattern-compressing or compressing. Then at least one component of S′ is also
non-separating and has smaller pattern-complexity than S.
Proof. The lemma is straightforward and well known in the case of a compression.
So suppose that we pattern-compress S. We decrease −4χ(S) by 4 and increase
|S∩P| by at most 2. So χp certainly goes down by at least 2. Note that at
least one component of S′ is non-separating. Thus, the lemma is proved in the
case where S′ is connected. However, we need to consider the possibility that we
have created a separating componentS′
1 with negative pattern-complexity. Suppose
that this occurs. Let S′
2 be the other component of S′ which is necessarily non-
separating. Note that S′
1 is a disc and it must intersect P at least twice by the
deﬁnition of a pattern-compression. If S′
1 has three points of intersection with
P , then |S′
2∩P| <|S∩P| and hence χp(S′
2) < χp(S). If S′
1 has two points of
intersection withP , then both of these must lie in S by the deﬁnition of a pattern-
compression. Hence, again χp(S′
2)<χ p(S). □
Corollary 3.7 (Simplest surface pattern-incompressible) . Let (M,P ) be a com-
pact orientable 3-manifold with a boundary pattern. Let S be a properly embedded
connected orientable surface that is non-separating and that has smallest pattern-
complexity among all such surfaces. Then S is pattern-incompressible and incom-
pressible.
Lemma 3.8 (Essential pushes forward). LetM be a compact orientable 3-manifold
with essential boundary pattern P . Let S be a connected pattern-incompressible
incompressible surface properly embedded in M, which is not a disc intersecting P
in at most 3 points. Then M\\S inherits an essential boundary pattern P′.
Proof. Let D be a disc properly embedded in M\\S with ∂D∩P′ at most three
points. The curve ∂D may run through parts of ∂(M\\S) coming from ∂M and
parts coming from S. Note however the points where it swaps must be points of
∂D∩P′, and that at most one side of any point of ∂D∩P′ lies in S. Hence, at
most one arc or simple closed curve of ∂D\\P′ lies in S.
Case 1. ∂D is disjoint from S.
Then ∂D⊂∂M . Since P is essential, ∂D bounds a disc D′ in ∂M intersecting
P in the empty set, an arc or a tripod. If S intersectsD′, then pick a simple closed
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 11
curve of S∩D′ innermost in D′. The disc this bounds cannot be a compression
disc for S. Hence, S must be a disc. By assumption, S intersects P in at least 4
points. Hence, it intersects some edge of P∩D′ more than once. We can therefore
ﬁnd a pattern-compression disc for S, which is contrary to assumption. Hence, D′
is disjoint from S, and therefore lies in ∂(M\\S). This veriﬁes that D is not a
violating disc for P′.
Case 2. ∂D lies in S.
By the incompressibility of S, ∂D bounds a disc D′ in S. This is a disc in
∂(M\\S) disjoint from P′. So D is not violating.
Case 3. ∂D intersectsS in an arc.
Then ∂D\\S intersects P at most once. Since D is not a pattern-compression
disc for S, D∩S separates oﬀ a disc D1 of S intersectingP in at most one point.
Then, D∪D1 is a disc properly embedded in M, intersecting P in at most two
points. Since P is essential, there is therefore a discD2 in∂M with∂D2 =∂(D∪D1)
and with D2∩P either empty or an arc. Therefore, D1∪D2 is a disc in ∂(M\\S)
intersectingP′ in an arc or a tripod.
This gives that P′ is essential. □
We also have following well known result.
Lemma 3.9 (Irreducible pushes forward) . Let M be a compact orientable irre-
ducible 3-manifold. Let S be a properly embedded incompressible surface with no
2-sphere components. Then M\\S is irreducible.
We will occasionally want to cut along surfaces in the expectation that they are
pattern-incompressible. An example of this is as follows.
Lemma 3.10 (Decomposition along square) . Let (M,P ) be a compact orientable
3-manifold with an essential boundary pattern. Let S be a properly embedded disc
that intersects P four times. Then S is pattern-incompressible unless ∂S bounds a
disc D in ∂M that has one of the following forms:
(1) D∩P consists of two arcs; or
(2) D∩P is a graph with two vertices joined by an edge, along with four edges
running to the boundary of D.
Proof. Suppose that, on the contrary, S has a pattern-compression disc D′. Then
S\\D′ has two componentsS1 andS2, each of which is a disc intersecting P twice.
Fori = 1 and 2, let D′
i be Si∪D′ isotoped a little so that it is disjoint from S.
Then D′
i is properly embedded in M and intersects P either two or three times.
If each of these discs intersects P twice, then using the fact that P is essential,
we deduce that ∂S bounds a disc D in ∂M as in (1) above. If both D′
1 and D′
2
intersectP three times, then we deduce that ∂S bounds a disc D in ∂M as in (1)
or (2) above. □
Deﬁnition 3.11. We say that a disc S properly embedded in M intersecting the
pattern four times is a square. It is trivial if ∂S bounds a disc D in ∂M satisfying
(1) or (2) of Lemma 3.10. (See Figure 5.) Otherwise it is non-trivial.
We rephrase and extend Lemma 3.10 as follows.
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 12
P P
∂M ∂MD D
Figure 5. Trivial squares
Lemma 3.12. Let (M,P ) be a compact orientable 3-manifold with a boundary
pattern. Let S be a non-trivial square. Then a pattern-compression disc for S
yields a violating disc for (M,P ). This violating disc is one of the components of
the surface obtained by pattern-compressing S.
We now have many of the elements required for the proof of Theorem 2.5. Let
(M,P ) be a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold with an essential boundary
pattern. Our aim is to build an essential hierarchy for ( M,P ). If M is closed, then
by assumption, it contains a properly embedded incompressible orientable surface
with no 2-sphere components. Decomposing along this surface gives an irreducible
3-manifold with non-empty boundary and essential (empty) boundary pattern. So,
we may assume that ∂M is non-empty. If ∂M is a union of spheres, then these
bound 3-balls by the irreducibility ofM, and so in this case there is nothing to prove.
Hence, we may assume thatb1(∂M )> 0. Since b1(M)≥b1(∂M )/2, we deduce that
b1(M)> 0. Therefore, M contains a properly embedded connected orientable non-
separating surface S. By picking S to have smallest pattern-complexity, we may
assume thatS is incompressible and pattern-incompressible by Corollary 3.7. When
we decompose along such a surface, Lemmas 3.8 and 3.9 imply that the resulting
manifold is irreducible and has essential boundary pattern. We may therefore repeat
with this manifold. However, we must show that this process can be arranged to
terminate. In [12], a proof was given using Kneser’s theorem bounding the number
of disjoint non-parallel properly embedded incompressible boundary-incompressible
surfaces in a compact 3-manifold. In the following section, we give an alternative
proof. Although longer than the proof in [12], it will be more useful because it will
lead to a good bound on the length of the resulting hierarchy.
4. Handle structures and normal surfaces
Our algorithm deals with partial hierarchies. The way that the surfaces in these
partial hierarchies are encoded is as normal surfaces. Normal surface theory takes
place in a 3-manifold equipped either with a triangulation or with a handle struc-
ture. We mostly use handle structures, as they behave better than triangulations
when the 3-manifold is decomposed along a normal surface. Normal surfaces in
handle structures have been used in the theory of hierarchies since the work of
Haken [4] and Waldhausen [22]. One of their particular uses is as a method for
controlling the length of hierarchies, in other words the number of decompositions
until the manifold has been cut up into balls.
Deﬁnition 4.1. In this paper, a handle structure on a 3-manifold or a 2-manifold
will satisfy the following conditions:
(1) each i-handle Di×Dk−i (k = 2 or 3) intersects the handles of lower index
in ∂D i×Dk−i;
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 13
(2) any two i-handles are disjoint;
(3) in the case of a 3-manifold, the intersection of any 1-handle D1×D2 with
any 2-handle D2×D1 is of the form D1×α in D1×D2 where α is a
collection of arcs in ∂D 2, and of the form β×D1 in D2×D1 where β is a
collection of arcs in ∂D 2;
(4) any 2-handle runs over at least one 1-handle.
Deﬁnition 4.2. LetH be a handle structure for a 3-manifold and fori∈{ 0, 1, 2, 3},
letHi denote the union of the i-handles. The characteristic surface forH isH0∩
(H1∪H 2). We denote it byF(H), or simply byF when the context is clear. It has
a handle structure consisting of just 0-handles and 1-handles, where the 0-handles
areF 0(H) =H0∩H 1 and the 1-handles are F 1(H) =H0∩H 2. We will view the
characteristic surface as a subsurface of ∂H0.
We denote the number of 0-handles in the handle structure H by|H|.
Deﬁnition 4.3. A handle structure for a 3-manifold M with boundary pattern P
is a handle structure forM satisfying Deﬁnition 4.1 such thatP is disjoint from the
2-handles and, for each 1-handle H1 =D1×D2, the intersection H1∩P isD1×X
where X is a ﬁnite set of points in ∂D 2.
We will be decomposing handle structures along normal surfaces. But ﬁrst we
deal with the following weaker notion.
Deﬁnition 4.4. LetH be a handle structure of a 3-manifold M with boundary
pattern P . We say that a surface S properly embedded in M is standard with
respect toH if the following hold:
(1) it intersects each 0-handle in a collection of disjoint properly embedded
discs;
(2) it intersects each 1-handle D1×D2 in a surface of the form D1×C for
some arcs C properly embedded in D2;
(3) it intersects each 2-handle D2×D1 in a surface of the form D2×X for
some ﬁnite collection of points X in the interior of D1;
(4) it is disjoint from the 3-handles;
(5) it intersects P transversely.
We have analogous deﬁnitions for 1-manifolds in surfaces.
Deﬁnition 4.5. LetH be a handle structure of a surface F . We say that a 1-
manifold C properly embedded in F is standard with respect toH if the following
hold:
(1) it intersects each 0-handle in a union of disjoint properly embedded arcs;
(2) it intersects each 1-handle D1×D1 in a union of arcs parallel to the core
of the handle, that is, arcs of the form D1×X for some ﬁnite collection of
points X in the interior of D1;
(3) it is disjoint from the 2-handles.
Deﬁnition 4.6. LetH be a handle structure for a 3-manifold M with boundary
pattern P . A curve C in ∂H0 is normal if it intersects P and ∂F transversely, its
intersection withF is standard and the following all hold:
(1) C does not lie entirely in ∂M−P ;
(2) C does not bound a disc in ∂H0−F that intersects P in a single arc or a
tripod;
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 14
(3) C intersects each 1-handle ofF in at most one arc;
(4) C intersects each component of ∂H0− (F∪ P ) in at most one arc;
(5) C does not intersect components ofF 1 and∂H0−(F∪P ) that are adjacent;
(6) if C intersects two components of ∂H0− (F∪ P ) that are incident along
an arc of P∩H 0, then C also intersects this arc;
(7) there is no disc in ∂H0 that has boundary equal to the union of a sub-arc
of C and a sub-arc of ∂F 0 is otherwise disjoint from C andF, and that
intersectsP in at most two arcs, each of which runs from ∂F 0 to C.
See Figure 6.
P
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
PP
P
P
P P
(1) (2) (3)
(4) (5) (6)
(7)
F 1F 1 F 0 β
β
β
β
β
α
γ
Figure 6. Conﬁgurations of the curve C in∂H0 that violate nor-
mality. In cases (3)-(7), arcs α, β or γ are shown that are part of
the boundary of a simplifying disc.
Deﬁnition 4.7. LetH be a handle structure for a 3-manifold M with boundary
pattern P . A surface S properly embedded in M is normal with respect toH if it
is standard and each component of S∩∂H0 is normal.
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 15
In the case where the pattern P is empty, Deﬁnition 4.6 becomes the usual
deﬁnition of a normal surface in a handle structure, for example as in [18, Deﬁnition
3.4.1]. Most of the conditions in Deﬁnition 4.6 are natural generalisations to the
case of general pattern. The possible exception is (7), which seems somewhat ad
hoc. However, it will be used to establish that manifolds appearing in a hierarchy
embed in the original manifold in a ‘simple’ way. (See Theorem 11.3.)
There is a way of understanding the deﬁnition of normality in terms of simplifying
discs, as follows.
Deﬁnition 4.8. LetH be a handle structure for a 3-manifold M with boundary
pattern P . Let S be a standard surface properly embedded in M. Then a sim-
plifying disc for S is a disc D lying in a 0-handle H0 ofH satisfying one of the
following:
(1) ∂D is the concatenation of two arcs α⊂S andβ⊂∂H0, whereα =D∩S,
and β = D∩∂H0 is an arc on the boundary of a 2-handle of H that is
vertical in its product structure (see Figure 7 and Figure 6 (3));
(2) ∂D is disjoint from P and is the concatenation of three arcs α⊂ S, β⊂
∂H0∩∂M and γ⊂ ∂H0∩H 2, where α = D∩S, β = D∩∂M and γ is
an arc on the boundary of a 2-handle of H that is vertical in its product
structure (see Figure 6 (5));
(3) ∂D intersects P at most once and is the concatenation of two arcs α⊂S
and β⊂∂H0, where α =D∩S, and β =D∩∂H0 is an arc in ∂M that is
not parallel to an arc of S∩∂H0∩∂M intersectingP at most once (Figure
6 (4) and (6));
(4) D is a subset of ∂H0 and ∂D is the concatenation of two arcs α =D∩S
andβ =D∩F 0, and with the properties that D is otherwise disjoint from
F and that D intersects P in at most two arcs, each of which runs from
∂F 0 to C (see Figure 6 (7)).
part of 2-handle part of 0-handle H0
part of S∩H 0
β
α
D
S
S
Figure 7. A simplifying disc D
The following is immediate from the deﬁnition of normality.
Lemma 4.9. LetH be a handle structure for a 3-manifoldM with boundary pattern
P . Then a surface S properly embedded inM is normal if and only if the following
all hold:
(1) S is standard;
(2) S has no simplifying disc;
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 16
(3) no component of S is a disc lying in a 0-handle that is parallel to a disc in
∂M∩∂H0 intersectingP in the empty set, an arc or tripod.
We will want to place properly embedded surfaces into normal form. In general,
we may need to make modiﬁcations to the surface in order to do this. These
modiﬁcations will not increase the following quantities.
Deﬁnition 4.10. LetH be a handle structure of a compact orientable 3-manifold
M, and letS be a standard surface properly embedded inM. The weight ofS is the
number of components of S∩H 2. The extended weight ofS is|S∩H 2| +|S∩H 1|.
Lemma 4.11 (Normalising a surface). LetM be a compact orientable 3-manifold
with boundary pattern P . Let S be a compact orientable surface properly embedded
in M transverse to P that is non-trivial in H2(M,∂M ). Then, after applying a
sequence of isotopies preserving P , compressions and pattern-compressions, some
component of the resulting surface is normal and either non-separating or a violating
disc. Moreover, if S is standard in H, then the weight and extended weight of the
resulting normal surface are at most the weight and extended weight of S.
Proof. We may readily ensure thatS is standard. In particular, if S intersects some
0-handleH0 in anything other than discs, then we may modify it, keeping S∩∂H0
unchanged but ensuring that each of these curves bounds a disc inH0. This process
is achieved by a sequence of isotopies and compressions.
We may further assume thatS has no component that is a boundary-parallel disc,
as we could remove this component and the surface would still be homologically
non-trivial.
Suppose that S is not normal. Then by Lemma 4.9, S has a simplifying disc.
The ﬁrst and second types of simplifying disc can be used to pattern-isotope S to
reduce its weight without increasing|S∩H 1|. The third type of simplifying disc is
a potential pattern-compression disc for S. It satisﬁes (1) and (2) in Deﬁnition 3.1,
but possibly not (3). We can pattern-compressS along this disc. IfS was a violating
disc, then some component of the resulting surface is again a violating disc, and
we work with this instead. If S was non-separating, but the pattern-compression
produces a violating disc, then we work with this violating disc instead. However,
if the pattern-compression creates a component that is a boundary parallel disc,
but not a violating disc, then discard it. The resulting surface has smaller extended
weight and no greater weight thanS. On the other hand, if the pattern-compression
does not create a violating disc or a boundary-parallel disc, then some component
of the resulting surface is non-separating, has smaller χp and no greater weight
or extended weight. The fourth type of simplifying disc speciﬁes an isotopy of S,
which reduces the number of components of S∩H 1 and that leaves the weight of
S unchanged. At each stage, we are either reducing χp or leaving it unchanged
and reducing extended weight. So this process terminates. The resulting surface
is normal, connected, and orientable. Moreover, it is either non-separating or a
violating disc. □
5. Decomposing a handle structure along a normal surface
We now wish to show that when (M,P ) is decomposed along a normal surface,
the resulting manifold is, in some sense, simpler than the original one. The notion
of complexity that goes down is deﬁned in terms of handle structures. Its deﬁnition
needs to take account of the boundary pattern, as follows.
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 17
Deﬁnition 5.1. LetH be a handle structure for ( M,P ), and let F(H) be its
characteristic surface. For a 0-handle H ofH, its index I(H) is deﬁned to be the
sum of χp(F ), over all components F of H∩F (H).
Note thatχp(F ) can be computed from the 0-handles D ofF , as follows. Deﬁne
the index of D to be
I(D) =
∑
D
(
−4 + 2|D∩F 1| +|D∩P|
)
.
Then χp(F ) is∑
DI(D), as D ranges over each 0-handle of F .
Lemma 5.2 (Behaviour of index under decomposition) . LetH′ be obtained from
H by decomposing along a standard surface S. Let D be a 0-handle of F. Then
the sum, over all components D′ of D∩H′, of I(D′) is equal to I(D). Hence, for
any component F ofF(H), the sum, over all components F′ of F∩H′, of χp(F′)
is equal to χp(F ).
Proof. Let D be 0-handle of F. Its intersection with S is a collection of properly
embedded arcs. Say that there are n of them. (See Figure 8.) Then decomposing D
along these arcs givesn+1 discs and so this changes the index by−4n. The endpoint
of each arc either lies in F 1(H) or in ∂M . In the former case, this component of
F 1(H) is decomposed along the extension of the arc into F 1(H). Hence this gives
an increase of 2 to the index. If the endpoint of the arc lies in ∂M , then we get
two new points of intersection between D∩H′ and the boundary pattern. Hence,
again this increases the index by 2. So each arc leads to an increase in index by 4.
Therefore, in total, the index is unchanged. □
P P' P' P'
P'
P'
P'
P'
S S
decompose
F(H) F(H')
Figure 8. Decomposition ofF(H) along S
We will mostly want to deal with handle structures with the following property.
Deﬁnition 5.3. A handle structure H for (M,P ) is admissible if the following
both hold:
(1) each 0-handle ofF either has positive index or has zero index and is disjoint
from P ;
(2) for any simple closed curve C lying in a 0-handle of H, that is disjoint
fromF, and that intersects P at most 3 times, C bounds a disc in ∂H0
intersectingP in the empty set, an arc or a tripod.
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 18
P PP P
P
P P
F 1F 1
Figure 9. The possible 0-handles of F with negative index
P
P
P
P
P
P
F 1F 1 F 1
not admissible
Figure 10. The possible 0-handles of F with zero index
Proposition 5.4 (Create admissible handle structure) . Let (M,P ) be a
compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold with a boundary pattern, and let H be
a handle structure for (M,P ). Then there is an algorithm that either creates an
admissible handle structure for a manifold (M′,P′) that is obtained from (M,P )
by decomposing along disjoint non-trivial squares or provides a violating disc for
(M,P ).
Proof. The procedure that we will follow will not increase the index of any 0-handle
ofF. It will strictly decrease the number of 1-handles of H at each stage, and so
it is guaranteed to terminate. Suppose that there is a 0-handle D ofF that either
has negative index or has zero index and intersects P . Then D has at most one arc
of intersection withF 1. (See Figures 9 and 10.)
Suppose that it has exactly one such arc. Then D lies in a 1-handleH1 ofH and
the arc lies in a 2-handle H2 ofH, and we may remove H1∪H2 from the handle
structure. There may be one or two arcs of P running along H1. If so, then we
need to replace each component of F 1∩H2 with one or two arcs of P .
Suppose now that D is disjoint fromF 1. Then it is properly embedded in M. If
D has negative index, it intersects P in at most 3 points. We can then determine
whether ∂D bounds a disc D′ in ∂M intersecting P in either the empty set, an
arc or a tripod. If so, D∪D′ bounds a 3-ball in M, by irreducibility. We remove
this submanifold bounded by D∪D′, and we insert into D the boundary pattern
that was in D′. On the other hand, if ∂D does not bound such a disc D′, then D
is a violating disc. It might not be normal, but in this case, we can ﬁnd another
properly embedded disc in H0, disjoint from F, that also forms a violating disc
and intersecting P fewer times. Hence, we may assume that D is normal, and the
algorithm terminates with this disc. Suppose now that D has zero index, and hence
is a square. If it is a trivial square, it bounds a disc D′ in ∂M intersectingP as in
(1) or (2) of Lemma 3.10. We can then remove the submanifold bounded byD∪D′,
and insert intoD the boundary pattern that was inD′. If D is a non-trivial square,
then we decompose along it.
Now suppose that there is a simple closed curve C lying in a 0-handle of H,
that is disjoint fromF, and that intersects P at most 3 times, but that C does not
bound a disc in ∂H0 intersecting P in the empty set, an arc or a tripod. There is
always such a curveC when∂H0\\(F∪ P ) is not a union of discs. In that case, we
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 19
pickC to be boundary parallel in a component of ∂H0\\(F∪ P ) that is not a disc.
We can determine whether C bounds a disc D′ in∂M intersectingP in the empty
set, an arc or a tripod. If there is no such disc D′ in ∂M , then a disc properly
embedded inH0 bounded by C is a violating disc. On the other hand, if there is
such a disc D′, then we can remove the submanifold bounded by D∪D′ and insert
intoD the boundary pattern that was in D′.
We have performed a sequence of decompositions along squares. We need to
explain why we can take these squares all to be disjoint. We also need to explain
why a violating disc that is produced in the above process actually forms a violating
disc for (M,P ). We note that when we decompose along a square, the copies of
this disc in the resulting 3-manifold lie in 0-handles and are disjoint from handles of
higher index. In particular, they are disjoint from the later decomposing squares.
Moreover, they are disjoint from any later violating discs that are produced. Thus,
the squares are all disjoint from each other, and any violating disc that is produced
is actually a violating disc for ( M,P ).
□
One of the reasons why we work with admissible handle structures is that they
behave well when they are decomposed along a normal surface, as follows.
Lemma 5.5 (Decomposing an admissible handle structure). Let (M,P ) be a com-
pact orientable 3-manifold with a boundary pattern, and let H be an admissible
handle structure for (M,P ). Let S be a normal surface properly embedded in M,
and letH′ be the handle structure obtained by cutting along S. Then each 0-handle
ofF(H′) has non-negative index.
Proof. Suppose thatD′ is a 0-handle ofF(H′) with negative index. The possibilities
for D′ are shown in Figure 9.
Suppose ﬁrst that D′ intersectsF 1(H′) in a single arc and is disjoint from P′. If
∂D′ is disjoint fromS, thenD′ forms a 0-handle ofF(H) that violates the assump-
tion that H is admissible. Therefore, ∂D′ must intersect S and this intersection
must be an arc, because ∂D′ is disjoint from P′. But this implies that S violated
(3) in the deﬁnition of normality.
Suppose now that D′ intersectsF 1(H′) in a single arc and intersects P′ in a
point. Again, ∂D′ cannot be disjoint from S. It must therefore intersect S in an
arc. But this implies that S violated (5) in the deﬁnition of normality.
Suppose that D′ missesF 1(H′). Now D′ is a subset of a 0-handle D ofF 0(H),
and its boundary alternates between arcs of S∩D and arcs lying in ∂D. Since D′
intersects the pattern at most three times, there can be at most three such arcs.
But in fact, there must be an even number of them. There must be at least one arc
of S∩D lying in ∂D′, as otherwise D′ =D, contradicting the assumption that H
is admissible. Hence, D′∩S is an outermost arc in D. The remainder of ∂D′ is an
arcA in∂D intersectingP at most once. The arcs of S∩ (∂H0\\(F∪ P )) incident
to ∂D′ lie in the same component of ∂H0\\(F∪ P ) or in adjacent components of
∂H0\\(F∪ P ). Hence, by (4) and (6) in the deﬁnition of normality, they are either
equal or they meet at a point of P . So the endpoints of D′∩S are joined by an
arc of S∩ (∂H0\\F). The union of this latter arc and A is a simple closed curve
C that intersects P in at most two points. So by admissibility, C bounds a disc in
∂H0 intersecting P in an arc or the empty set. But then (7) in the deﬁnition of
normality is contradicted. □
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 20
In an admissible handle structure, we permit some 0-handles of F to have zero
index. These give rise to the following types of handle of H.
Deﬁnition 5.6. LetH be a handle structure for ( M,P ). A handle H ofH is an
interior parallelity handle if one of the following holds:
(1) it is a 0-handle disjoint from P , each 0-handle ofF∩ H has index zero and
F∩ H is connected;
(2) it is a 1-handle disjoint from P and each 0-handle ofF∩ H has index zero;
(3) it is a 2-handle.
Each interior parallelity handle can be given a product structure D2×I so that the
intersection with any other 0-handle, 1-handle or 2-handle is of the formα×I where
α is a union of arcs in ∂D 2. These product structures are viewed as forming an I-
bundle structure and this I-bundle structure can be chosen compatibly over all the
parallelity handles. The union of the parallelity handles is the interior parallelity
bundle forH.
We will deﬁne more general versions of this structure in Section 14, which will
give rise to ‘parallelity bundles’. These important subsets of a handle structure have
had numerous applications, for example [14]. We recall the following terminology.
Deﬁnition 5.7. LetB be anI-bundle over a surfaceF . Then its vertical boundary
∂vB is the I-bundle over ∂F , and its horizontal boundary ∂hB is the (∂I)-bundle
overF .
When we decompose a handle structure H along a normal surface, we would
like the resulting handle structure H′ to be simpler than H, in some sense. The
measure of complexity that we will use is as follows.
Deﬁnition 5.8. Deﬁne the q-complexity cq(H) to be
∑
H
(max{I(H), 0})2,
where the sum is taken over 0-handles H ofH. Here, ‘q’ stands for ‘quadratic’.
Proposition 5.9 (Decomposition and q-complexity). LetH be an admissible han-
dle structure for (M,P ). Let S be a compact orientable connected non-separating
properly embedded normal surface. LetH′ be the handle structure obtained from H
by cutting along S. Then cq(H′)≤cq(H). Moreover, if this is an equality, then S
is homologous in H2(M,∂M ) to a vertical surface in the interior parallelity bundle
forH.
Proof. Consider any 0-handle H ofH. By Lemma 5.2, the sum, over all 0-handles
H′ of H∩H′, of I(H′) is equal to I(H). By Lemma 5.5, each 0-handle H′ has
non-negative index. Hence,
∑
H ′
I(H′)2≤I(H)2,
with equality if and only at most one 0-handle of H∩H′ has positive index and
the remaining components have zero index. We deduce that cq(H′)≤cq(H).
Suppose that this is an equality. We will show that S is homologous to a surface
inB. Consider a component S′ of S\\B. We will deﬁne a transverse orientation
on S′ and will show that S′ with this transverse orientation is homologous to a
2-chain in ∂M∪B . Since S′ is connected, this transverse orientation is either the
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 21
same as or opposite to the one it inherits from S. Hence, S′ is homologous in
H2(M\\B,∂ (M\\B)) to a 2-chain in B. Since this is true for each component of
S\\B, we deduce that S is homologous to a 2-chain in B.
We ﬁrst deﬁne the transverse orientation on the components of S′∩H 0. Each
such component lies within a 0-handleH ofH not lying inB. This 0-handle cannot
be disjoint from the 1-handles, since it would then form a 3-ball component of M,
which cannot contain a properly embedded non-separating surface. It therefore
has at least one 0-handle of F(H). It cannot be the case that all 0-handles of
H∩F (H) have zero index since H would then be part of the interior parallelity
bundle, contrary to assumption. So H∩F (H) has positive index. This is the same
index as a unique 0-handle H′ ofH∩H′. The remaining 0-handles of H∩H′ have
zero index. We orient this component of S′∩H 0 away from H′. This transverse
orientation extends over the components ofS′∩H1 as follows. Each such component
lies within a 1-handle H1 that has two components of intersection with F 0(H).
SinceH is admissible and H1 does not lie in the interior parallelity bundle, these
two components of F 0(H) have positive index. They are divided up by S′ into
components ofF 0(H′). In each of these two components of F 0(H), exactly one of
these components ofF 0(H′) has positive index. The adjacent discs of S′∩H 0 point
away from this. Hence, we may extend the transverse orientation consistently over
the components of S′∩H 1. Note that S′ is actually disjoint from the 2-handles,
since these are part of the interior parallelity bundle.
We now show thatS′ with this transverse orientation is homologous to a 2-chain
inB. Each component of S′∩H i is a disc. It lies within a handle H ofH. If we
were to cut H along this component of S′∩H i, we would obtain two 3-balls. We
say that the 3-ball component into which this component points is associated with
it. The union of these balls forms a 3-chain, the boundary of which is the union of
S′ and a 2-chain in∂M∪B . Thus, S′ is equal inH2(M\\B,∂ (M\\B)) to a 2-chain
inB, and so S is equal in H2(M,∂M ) to a 2-chain inB with boundary in ∂M . By
replacing this 2-chain with a 2-chain that is equal in H2(M,∂M ), we may assume
that it is a surface properly embedded inB disjoint from∂vB. Furthermore, we may
assume that it is incompressible and also admits no boundary compression discs
disjoint from∂vB. Each component of such a surface is either vertical or horizontal
inB. But an orientable horizontal surface is homologically trivial. Hence, we have
shown that S is homologous to a vertical surface in B. □
Lemma 5.10 (Cutting along a vertical surface). Let (M,P ) be a compact orientable
3-manifold with a boundary pattern. Let H be an admissible handle structure for
(M,P ) and let B be its interior parallelity bundle. Let S be a vertical surface in
B that is properly embedded and non-separating in M. Then S may be placed in
normal form and when H is cut along S, the resulting handle structure H′ satisﬁes
cq(H′) =cq(H). Moreover, the following quantities do not increase and at least one
strictly decreases: the total number of components of F 1 in the 0-handles of H with
positive index, and the number of interior parallelity 0-handles.
Proof. The interior parallelity bundle is an I-bundle over a surfaceF . We give F a
handle structure as follows. Each i-handle ofB vertically projects onto an i-handle
ofF . In addition, we create a 0-handle of F for each component of ∂vB∩F 0 and a
1-handle ofF for each component of∂vB∩F 1. We call the latter handles boundary
handles, since they form a regular neighbourhood of ∂F . They are added to ensure
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 22
that we really do have a handle structure for F . Without them, we would have
1-handles or 2-handles not completely attached to lower index handles.
The vertical surface S projects to a simple closed curve C in F . We isotope
C so that it is normal in the handle structure of F . A corresponding isotopy of
S makes it normal. When C runs over any boundary 0-handles of F , then the
corresponding normal discs of S lie in 0-handles of H that are not parallelity 0-
handles and hence that have positive index. When we decompose along these discs,
then this reduces the number of components of F 1 in these handles. When C
runs through 0-handles in the interior of F , the corresponding normal discs of S
decompose interior parallelity 0-handles of H. This reduces the number of such
0-handles.
By Proposition 5.9, cq(H′)≤ cq(H). In fact, this is an equality because the
eﬀect on F of the decomposition is to remove some lines of index zero 0-handles
and 1-handles and replace them by two parallel arcs of pattern. Hence for any
0-handle H ofH, its index is unchanged by the decomposition. □
The following is easily veriﬁed.
Lemma 5.11. The algorithm Create admissible handle structure in Propo-
sition 5.4 does not increase any of the following quantities: the q-complexity of H,
the total number of components of F 1 in the 0-handles of H with positive index,
and the number of interior parallelity 0-handles.
We are now in a position to complete the proof of Theorem 2.5.
Proof. We have proved one direction of the theorem in Lemma 3.3. Therefore, let
(M,P ) be a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold with an essential boundary
pattern. If M is closed, then we are assuming that it contains a properly embedded
orientable incompressible surface with no 2-sphere components. We must show that
(M,P ) admits an essential hierarchy.
If M is closed, we can decompose along the hypothesised surface, and the re-
sulting manifold is irreducible by Lemma 3.9 and has non-empty boundary and
essential (empty) pattern. So we may assume that ∂M is non-empty.
LetH be a handle structure for ( M,P ). By Proposition 5.4, there is a decom-
position along non-trivial squares, after which the manifold (which we continue
to denote by (M,P )) has an admissible handle structure. By Lemma 3.12, these
squares are pattern-incompressible and they are automatically incompressible be-
cause they are discs. Hence, by Lemma 3.8, the resulting pattern is essential and
by Lemma 3.9, the manifold is irreducible.
If ∂M has any sphere components, these bound 3-balls. Thus, we may assume
that∂M is not a union of spheres. Therefore, b1(M)> 0, and soM contains a con-
nected properly embedded non-separating orientable surface. Let S be such a sur-
face with smallest pattern-complexity. By Corollary 3.7,S is pattern-incompressible
and incompressible. By Lemma 4.11, it may be placed into normal form.
By Lemma 3.8, the manifold M′ obtained by decomposing along S inherits an
essential boundary pattern and by Lemma 3.9, it is irreducible. By Proposition
5.9, the handle structure H′ that it inherits has q-complexity at most that of H.
Moreover, its q-complexity is strictly less unlessS is homologous to a vertical surface
in the interior parallelity bundle.
In the case where S is homologous to a vertical surface in the interior parallelity
bundle, we instead use Lemma 5.10 to decompose along such a surface. This leaves
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 23
cq(H) unchanged. But it decreases the quantity m(H) which is the sum of the total
number of components ofF 1 in the 0-handles with positive index, and the number
of interior parallelity 0-handles.
Thus, if we consider the ordered pair (cq(H),m (H)) and we compare such pairs
using lexicographical ordering, then we have reduced this pair. We now apply
Proposition 5.4 to turn H′ into an admissible handle structure. By Lemma 5.11,
this does not increase cq(H′) or m(H′). Thus, we can repeat with this new handle
structure. Since the complexity pairs are being reduced at each stage, this process
must terminate, and so creates an essential hierarchy for ( M,P ). □
6. The algorithm to decide whether a pattern is essential
In this section, we present our algorithm required by Theorem 1.3. Thus, we are
given a triangulation for a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold M in which
P is simplicial, and we must decide whether P is essential. We may assume that
∂M is non-empty, as otherwise, the pattern is trivially essential. The ﬁrst step is
to build a handle structure H for (M,P ). In our algorithm, we will store several
lists:
(1) handle structures H1,..., Hℓ for 3-manifolds M1,...,M ℓ with boundary
patterns P1,...,P ℓ;
(2) normal surfaces S1,...,S ℓ−1, where each Si is a normal surface in Hi and
where (Mi+1,P i+1) = (Mi,P i)\\Si withHi+1 its induced handle structure.
The algorithm is as follows:
(1) Set H1 to be the initial handle structure H and set ℓ to be 0.
(2) Apply the algorithm Create admissible handle structure in Propo-
sition 5.4 toHℓ+1. If this produces a violating disc D, go to Step (12).
(3) If Proposition 5.4 creates an admissible handle structure, then add any
decomposing squares that have been used to the hierarchy. Increase ℓ by 1
(if no squares were used) or 2 (if squares were used).
(4) Using linear algebra compute b1(Mℓ).
(5) If b1(Mℓ) = 0, then go to Step (9).
(6) By reaching this step, b1(Mℓ) must be positive. If there is a vertical
connected surface in the interior parallelity bundle for Mℓ that is non-
separating in Mℓ, let Sℓ be such a surface, isotoped so that is normal as in
Lemma 5.10. Otherwise, let Sℓ be any connected, non-separating, properly
embedded, oriented normal surface Sℓ in Mℓ. (See Theorem 6.2 below for
a simple and fast construction of such a surface.)
(7) Is some component of Sℓ a violating disc for ( Mℓ,P ℓ)? If yes, then set D
to be this component and go to Step (12).
(8) Set (Mℓ+1,P ℓ+1) to be (Mℓ,P ℓ)\\Sℓ and setHℓ+1 to be its induced handle
structure. Go to Step (2).
(9) By reaching this step, b1(Mℓ) must be 0, and so ∂Mℓ must be a union of
spheres. Examine whether the intersection of Pℓ with each such sphere is
connected. If not, then we obtain a violating disc. Then examine all isotopy
classes of simple closed loops in ∂Mℓ that intersect Pℓ transversely in at
most 3 points. (Equivalently, consider whether the intersection between Pℓ
and each component of ∂Mℓ is connected. If it is, examine all closed loops
of length at most 3 in the dual graph.) For each such simple closed curve,
determine whether it bounds a violating disc.
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 24
(10) If no violating disc is found, then ( Mℓ,P ℓ) is essential, and therefore by
Theorem 2.5, so is (M,P ). In this situation, the algorithm terminates with
a declaration that P is essential and it outputs the hierarchy that has been
constructed.
(11) By reaching this step, ∂Mℓ is a union of spheres and the algorithm has
found a closed loop in ∂Mℓ that bounds a violating disc D.
(12) Is D a violating disc for the initial manifold ( M,P )? If so, then the al-
gorithm terminates by declaring that P is inessential and it outputs the
violating disc D.
(13) By reaching this step, D must run over at least one surface in the hierarchy.
Let Sj be the last surface in the hierarchy that intersects D.
(14) Is D a compression disc or pattern-compression disc for Sj? If not, then
∂D∩Sj must in fact be a boundary-parallel arc in Sj, separating oﬀ a disc
D′ that intersects the pattern Pj at most once. Moreover, D∪D′ must be
a violating disc for ( Mj,P j). In this case, replace D by D∪D′ and go to
Step (12).
(15) By reaching this step, D forms a compression disc or pattern-compression
disc forSj inMj. Compress or pattern-compress Sj along this disc to form
a properly embedded surface. Perform isotopies and possibly compressions
and pattern-compressions to this surface, and possibly discard components,
to obtain a compact orientable connected properly embedded normal sur-
face Sj that is non-separating in Mj or that is a violating disc for Pj.
Replace Sj by Sj. Discard all later surfaces in the hierarchy. Set ℓ to be
equal to j. Go to Step (7).
Start here.
Set H  = H.
Set l = 0.
Compute
b (M ) Is b (M ) > 0?
Then ∂M  is spheres. Is 
there a curve in ∂M  
bounding a violating disc?
P is essential
No
No No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Pick a  
violating 
disc D 
1
1 l
l l
1 l
l
l
l
l
l Find a connected orientable 
non-separating properly 
embedded normal surface S
Set M    = M \\ S and 
let H     be the induced 
handle structure
l+1
l+1
l+1Increase l by 1 (if no
squares were used) 
or 2 (otherwise)
j
Is some component
of S  a violating
disc for (M , P )?
P is inessential
No
The hierarchy construction loop
The surface 
simplification 
process
Either convert H      into an admissible 
handle structure using decompositions
along non-trivial squares or provide 
a violating disc
Does this create a
violating disc?
Use D to simplify
S . Set l = j and
discard later surfaces. 
Is this a 
violating disc 
for (M,P)?
Is there a non-separating
vertical surface in the interior
parallelity bundle for H ?
Set S   to be this surface
9
223
4
1
5
10
11 12
13
15
12
6
6
6
7
8
Let S  be the 
last surface that 
D runs over
j Is D a compression or 
pattern-compression
disc for S  ?
14
Yes
∂D ∩ S  must be an arc separating
off a disc D′ in S  that intersects
the pattern at most once.
j
j
Replace D by
D ∪ D′
j
14
14
No
l
l l
Set D to be
this component
7
Figure 11. The algorithm to determine whether a pattern is essential
Theorem 6.1 (The algorithm works). This algorithm terminates with the correct
declaration either that P is essential or that P is inessential. Moreover when P
is essential, the algorithm outputs an essential hierarchy for (M,P ). When P is
inessential, it outputs a violating disc.
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 25
Proof. It is clear that if the algorithm terminates, then its output is correct. For if
it terminates by declaring thatP is inessential, then it does so because it has found
a violating disc. If it terminates by declaring that P is essential, then it does so
because it has found an essential hierarchy for ( M,P ).
We must show that the algorithm terminates. We ﬁrst note that it cannot
remain in the hierarchy construction loop (Steps (2) to (8)) forever. Suppose that,
on the contrary, it does. Each time we go through Step (6), we have an admissible
handle structure Hℓ. If there is no non-separating vertical surface in the interior
parallelity bundle, then any connected normal orientable non-separating surface
is chosen or a violating disc is found. If a violating disc is found, then we leave
the hierarchy construction loop. If a connected normal orientable non-separating
surface is chosen, then by Proposition 5.9, cutting along this surface strictly reduces
the q-complexity cq(Hℓ). When there is a vertical surface, then by Lemma 5.10,
cutting along it leaves cq(Hℓ) unchanged, but it reduces m(Hℓ). Then when the
handle structure is made admissible in Step (2) using Proposition 5.4, none of
these quantities increases. Hence, the ordered pair ( cq(Hℓ),m (Hℓ)) decreases at
each stage. But this contradicts the fact that these pairs are well-ordered.
So, if the algorithm does not terminate, it must leave the hierarchy construction
loop inﬁnitely often. Index these occurrences by the natural numbers i. At the ith
stage, let
(Si
1,...,S i
ℓ(i))
be the partial hierarchy that is currently stored. When the algorithm leaves the
hierarchy construction loop and does not immediately then terminate, a violating
disc D is found. Furthermore, D runs over at least one surface in the partial hier-
archy, unless the algorithm immediately terminates. Let Si
j be the last surface that
it runs over. Suppose ﬁrst that D is not a compression disc or pattern-compression
disc for Si
j. Then D∩Si
j is either a simple closed curve that bounds a disc in Si
j or
an arc inSi
j that separates oﬀ a disc in Si
j intersectingPj at most once. If D∩Si
j is
a simple closed curve bounding a discD′ inSj, thenD∪D′ is a sphere. By the irre-
ducibility ofM, this bounds a ball in M. The boundary of this ball is disjoint from
the surfaces Si
1,...,S i
j−1. Hence, each of these surfaces must be disjoint from the
ball, by our assumption that each surface is either connected and non-separating or
a disjoint union of non-trivial squares. Thus, D∪D′ bounds a ball in Mj. None of
the later surfaces Si
j+1,...,S i
ℓ(i) can enter this ball, again by our assumption that
each is either connected and non-separating or a disjoint union non-trivial squares.
Therefore, D′ lies in Mℓ(i) and its interior is disjoint from Pℓ(i). This contradicts
the assumption thatD is a violating disc for (Mℓ(i),P ℓ(i)). Suppose now that D∩Si
j
is an arc in Si
j that separates oﬀ a disc D′ inSi
j intersectingPj at most once. Then
D∪D′ is a disc properly embedded in Mj intersecting the pattern at most twice.
Suppose that this is not a violating disc for ( Mj,P j). Then ∂(D∪D′) bounds a
discD′′ in∂Mj that intersectsPj either in a single arc of the empty set. The union
of these three discs bounds a ball that none of the earlier surfaces or later surfaces
can enter. Hence, D′∪D′′ contains an arc or tripod of Pℓ(i). This contradicts the
fact that D is a violating disc for (Mℓ(i),P ℓ(i)). Hence, the algorithm does produce
a violating disc for (Mj,P j), as claimed in Step (14).
Hence, the algorithm eventually produces a compression or pattern-compression
disc for some Si
j and the later surfaces are discarded. This reduces χp(Si
j). Now,
χp(Si
1) can decrease only ﬁnitely many times. Hence, there is some point after
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 26
which Si
1 remains unchanged. Let S1 be this ﬁnal surface. After this point, the
manifold obtained by cutting along S1 remains unchanged. We therefore consider
the surfaces Si
2 after this point. Again, these can change only ﬁnitely many times,
and so there is some ﬁnal surface S2. Repeating this process, we obtain an inﬁnite
sequence of surfaces S1,S 2,... . We must show that this cannot occur. Let Hj be
the handle structure obtained from H by cutting along S1,...S j.
Now we note that if some surface in one of these hierarchies is a disc that inter-
sects the pattern four times, and at some stage we decrease its pattern-complexity,
then this creates a violating disc. This is then used to simplify an earlier surface in
the hierarchy. Thus, none of the surfaces Sj in our inﬁnite list is obtained from a
square by pattern-compressing.
Thus, the surfaces S1,S 2,... and handle structuresH1,H2,... have the follow-
ing property. Suppose that some Hj is admissible. If there is no non-separating
vertical surface in the interior parallelity bundle, then Sj is some connected normal
orientable non-separating surface. On the other hand, if there is such a vertical
surface, then Sj is as in Lemma 5.10. Then the next surfaces after Sj are possible
squares. The result is an admissible handle structure, and so on. As argued in the
proof of Theorem 2.5, this is impossible, because the ordered pair ( cq(Hj),m (Hj))
decreases as we pass from one admissible handle structure to the next one. □
One reason why the above algorithm works so well is that, in a compact ori-
entable 3-manifold M with b1(M)> 0, it is a very easy to construct a connected,
non-separating, properly embedded, oriented surface. We make this precise in the
following theorem. This seems to be well known, but it is so central to the eﬃciency
of our algorithm that we give a proof.
Theorem 6.2 (Build non-separating surface) . There is an algorithm that
takes, as its input, a triangulationT or handle structureH for a compact orientable
3-manifold M with boundary pattern P , and with b1(M) > 0. In the case where
∂M is non-empty, we also assume that H has no 3-handles. The algorithm builds
a connected, non-separating, properly embedded, oriented, normal surface S with
weight at most c|T| or extended weight at most c|H|. Here, c is a constant that is
universal in the case of a triangulation. In the case of a handle structure, c depends
on the number N, which is the maximum, over each 0-handle of H, of the number
of components of intersection between the 0-handle and each of the following: the
1-handles, the 2-handles, the vertices of P and the edges of P . The running time
is bounded above by a polynomial function of |T| or|H|, where the polynomial is
universal for triangulations and depends on N in the case of handle structures.
Proof. Let us initially assume that M is given via a triangulationT , since this case
is more straightforward.
We are assuming that H 1(M) is non-zero. Any non-zero element of this group
can be represented by a simplicial 1-cocycle, and indeed such a 1-cocycle is unique
if we require that its evaluation on each edge in some given maximal tree in the
1-skeleton is zero. So, one can set up a system of linear equations, with a vari-
able for each oriented edge not in this tree, and an equation specifying that the
total evaluation around each face is zero. Then any non-zero real solution to these
equations represents a non-trivial element of H 1(M; R). In fact, one can ensure
that the coeﬃcients of this element are rational, by imposing enough extra con-
straints specifying that some edges have zero evaluation, until the solution space is
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 27
1-dimensional, and then requiring that the sum of the coeﬃcients is 1. Then we can
multiply through by a suitable integer to obtain a non-zero solution with integer
coeﬃcients, which is a 1-cocycle representing a non-trivial element of H 1(M).
The size of the co-ordinates of this solution are bounded above by 2 12|T| for the
following reason. The system of equations has at most n = E−V + 1 variables,
where E and V are the number of edges of T . This is because a maximal tree has
V − 1 edges in it. Note that E−V + 1≤ E≤ 6|T| . There is an equation for
each face, as well as an equation that requires that the sum of the coeﬃcients is 1.
We also have extra conditions that require that some edges evaluate to zero. These
equations are combined into a single matrix equation Av =w, where A represents
the above equations,v is the solution, andw is the vector with all zeroes except the
ﬁnal entry, which is 1. We are assuming that the kernel of A is zero, and hence the
rank of A is equal to the number of variables. There is a square submatrix B of A
with the same number of columns of A having the same rank. Thus B is invertible.
We haveBv =w′, where w′ consists of some of the entries of w, and so all entries
are zero apart from one. Then v = B−1w′. Note that B−1 = (det(B))−1adj(B),
where det(B) is the determinant of B and adj(B) is the adjugate matrix. We can
obtain an integral solution by multiplying through by det( B). Each co-ordinate of
this integral solution is an entry of the adjugate matrix, which is the determinant
of a minor of B. The size of this is at most the product of the l2 norms of the
rows, which is at most 3 n√n≤ 22n≤ 212|T| , as required. Note that the procedure
used to produce this solution runs in polynomial time, since it involves computing
(n− 1)2 determinants.
From this, one can build a properly embedded surface representing an element
of H2(M,∂M ) dual to this 1-cocycle c, as follows. First, for each edge e of the
triangulation, place a collection of|c(e)| points along the interior of the edge. These
will be the intersection points between e and the surface. Pick a circular ordering
on the edges of each face. Since the evaluation of c around the face is zero, we may
join the points in the edges in pairs by a collection of disjoint normal arcs, so that
for each arc, one endpoint lies on an edge with positive evaluation and one endpoint
lies on an edge with negative evaluation. These arcs form the intersection between
the surface and the face. In the boundary of each tetrahedron, these arcs combine
to form a collection of normal curves, each with length three or four, and we may
ﬁll these in with normal triangles and squares. The result is a compact oriented
properly embedded surface dual to c. Any component of this surface can be used
as the required surface S. Such a component can be found using the algorithm of
Agol, Hass and Thurston [1, Corollary 17].
We now consider the case where M comes equipped with a handle structure
H. When ∂M is non-empty, we are assuming that H has no 3-handles. This
determines a cell structure on M, as follows. Each handle becomes a 3-cell. The
2-cells arise from the components of intersection between handles, as well as the
components of intersection between a handle and ∂M\\P . Some of these surfaces
might not be discs, in which case we decompose them along arcs forming 1-cells,
until they become discs. We will explain how to do this below. The remaining
1-cells arise from the components of intersection between any three handles, as well
as the components of intersection between pairs of handles and ∂M\\P , and also
the components of intersection between a handle and an edge of P . Finally, the
0-cells arise as follows: the components of intersection between four handles; the
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 28
components of intersection between any three handles and∂M\\P ; the components
of intersection between any two handles andP ; the vertices ofP . One arrangement
when non-disc components of intersection between handles arises is when a 1-handle
ofH is disjoint fromH2 andP . In that case, we insert a single vertical 1-cell running
along the 1-handle. The other scenario where non-disc components arise is in the
boundary of a 0-handle, since the intersection between the 0-handle and ∂M\\P
orH3 may have components other than discs. In that case, we insert properly
embedded 1-cells into the planar surface, but without adding any new 0-cells.
We now pick a maximal tree in the 1-skeleton of this cell structure. Our approach
will depend on whetherM is closed or has non-empty boundary. WhenM is closed,
we pick a maximal tree in the 1-skeleton of each 3-handle. The union of these trees
forms a forest in M. In each 1-handle disjoint from the 2-handles, we also add
the new vertical 1-cell to this forest. We then extend this to a maximal tree in
all of M. The eﬀect of this is that, for each 1-cocycle c that is zero on the edges
in the maximal tree, the evaluation of each 1-cell in each 3-handle is zero. This is
automatic for 1-cells in the maximal tree. But for any other 1-cell in a 3-handle, the
evaluation of c on that edge is equal to the evaluation of the loop that runs along
the edge, then through the maximal tree back to the start of the edge. This loop lies
entirely in the 3-handle, and so is homotopically trivial, and hence its evaluation
is zero, as claimed. When M has non-empty boundary, we pick a maximal tree
in the 1-skeleton of each 2-handle and again any new vertical edges in a 1-handle
are included in this forest. We also add each component of P∩H 1 to this forest.
Furthermore, for each disc component of H1∩ ∂M , we pick one of its arcs of
intersection withH0 and we declare that all but one of the 1-cells in that arc lies
in the forest. We again extend this to a maximal tree in M. This has the eﬀect
that the evaluation of each 1-cell in each 2-handle is actually zero.
As above, such cocycles c are solutions to a system of linear equations. The
variables correspond to the oriented 1-cells not in the maximal tree, and there is
an equation for each 2-cell. The argument above also gives that there is a non-zero
integral cocycle with the property that its value on each 1-cell has modulus that is
bounded above by an exponential function of|H|, where the exponent only depends
on the uniform type of H.
We now construct a surfaceS that is dual to this 1-cocyclec. For each 1-celle, we
insert|c(e)| points into its interior. These will be the points of intersection between
S ande. Each 2-cell is a polygon, and we have speciﬁed the intersection between S
and the boundary of this polygon. Since the total evaluation of the oriented edges
in this boundary is zero, we can insert transversely oriented arcs into the interior
of the polygon joining these points. Note that the 1-cells that are vertical in the
1-handles have zero evaluation, for the following reason. Each such 1-cell is either in
the boundary of a 3-handle, or in the intersection between a 2-handle and∂M , or is
an inserted 1-cell in a 1-handle disjoint from the 2-handles. For each such 1-cell, its
evaluation is zero. Each 2-cell in the vertical boundary of a 1-handle has four sides,
and we have just shown that the two vertical sides have zero evaluation. Hence, the
remaining two sides have the same evaluation. So the arcs that we insert into such
a 2-cell can be isotoped to be vertical. We can also ensure that the arcs in the two
polygons at the ends of this 1-handle correspond via the product structure. In the
boundary of each handle, these arcs patch together to form closed curves. We can
insert discs into the handle bounded by these curves. The result is a transversely
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 29
oriented, properly embedded surface dual to c. It is standard because it is disjoint
from the 3-handles and respects the product structure of the other handles of H.
For 1-handles, we have already arranged this. For 2-handles in a closed 3-manifold
M, this follows from the fact that the surface misses the 3-handles and intersects
each 1-cell in points of the same sign. When M has non-empty boundary, the
surface misses the 2-handles. Note also that all the points of intersection between
the surface and any arc component of H0∩H 1∩∂M have the same sign.
We need to arrange that this surface is in fact normal. We observe that when
M is closed, we have in fact already arranged this. When M is closed, the only
normality condition that is not automatic is (3) of Deﬁnition 4.6. However, for
each disc that we have inserted into a 0-handle, it runs over each component of F 1
at most once. For if it ran over a component of F 1 more than once, then there
would be two arcs of intersection in that component ofF 1 with opposite transverse
orientations. However, all the arcs of intersection between S and any component
ofF 1 are compatibly oriented.
We now deal with the case where M has non-empty boundary. Each component
of S∩H 0 intersects each component of ∂F 0\\(P∪F 1) and each component of
intersection between the edges of P andH0 at most once, since S intersects each
such component in points of the same sign. (This latter property is convenient at
this stage, but we will not maintain it in the modiﬁcations that we make below.)
So this results in ﬁnitely many types of disc in S∩H 0. For each such disc type D,
we deﬁne its complexity to be|D∩P|2 +|D∩F 1|2. This quantity is bounded above
by a constant depending only on the type ofH. The complexity ofS is equal to the
sum of the complexities of its disc types. Note that in this sum, we only consider
one disc of S∩H 0 of each type in each 0-handle. Hence, the complexity is bounded
above by a constant times |H0|, where the constant only depends on the uniform
type ofH.
We now examine the normality conditions (1)-(7) from Deﬁnition 4.6. Conditions
(1) and (2) are automatically satisﬁed. In our setting, S is disjoint from the 2-
handles, and so (3) and (5) are satisﬁed. If a curve ofS∩∂H0 intersects a component
of ∂H0− (F∪ P ) in more than one arc, contradicting (4), then we can pattern
compress such a disc. We can pattern compress all discs of this type. For each such
disc, this creates two discs D1 andD2. Discs of these types may already exist in S,
but this does not aﬀect our argument. The points of intersection between D andP
are shared out between D1 andD2. The same is true for D∩F 1. Hence, the total
complexity of S decreases. Note that when a pattern-compression is performed,
then the class that S represents in H2(M,∂M ) is unchanged. A similar argument
works when (6) in the deﬁnition of normality is violated. We pattern compress the
disc D to discs D1 and D2. This introduces two points of intersection with P , but
the complexity of these discs still decreases. Finally note that condition (7) must
be satisﬁed, since if it were not, then we obtain two points of intersection between
S and a component ofH1∩H 0∩∂M that are oriented towards or away from each
other, contrary to our construction. Thus we have constructed a normal surface.
Any component of this is our required normal surface. □
Remark 6.3. While this gives a simple construction of some surface S, mostly
using only elementary linear algebra, it is not necessary to follow this construction
in step (6) of the above algorithm to determine whether a boundary pattern is
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 30
essential. Indeed, any connected, non-separating, properly embedded, oriented,
normal surface can be used.
Remark 6.4. When Theorem 6.2 is applied to a handle structure H, both the
upper bound on the extended weight of the surface and the running time of the
algorithm depend on the quantityN. In most applications, N is bounded above by
a universal constant. For example, this is true when H is dual to a triangulation of
M in whichP is simplicial. More generally, we will see in Section 11 that typically
H can be arranged to be of ‘uniform type’ as one proceeds down a hierarchy. This
term is deﬁned in Deﬁnition 11.2, but it implies that N is bounded above by a
universal constant.
7. An example
We give an example of this algorithm in practice. We use it to show that the
tripus 3-manifold has incompressible boundary. This manifold is shown in (i) of
Figure 12. There, a 3-ball (represented by the outer circle) is shown, containing
a properly embedded graph. The tripus manifold is the exterior of this graph.
It is a famous example of a 3-manifold admitting a hyperbolic structure with to-
tally geodesic boundary. Totally geodesic boundary components of a hyperbolic
3-manifold are always incompressible. However, the application of our algorithm
gives a straightforward alternative proof of this.
The ﬁrst decomposing surface is a thrice-punctured sphere as shown in (ii) of
Figure 12. The exterior of this surface, with its boundary pattern, is shown in
(iii). The next surface is the four discs shown in red in (iv). The exterior of these
discs is two 3-balls. Their boundary patterns are shown in (v) and (vi). It is easily
checked that they are essential. Hence, the empty boundary pattern for the tripus
manifold is essential. In other words, the boundary is incompressible. Furthermore,
the manifold is irreducible.
A skeptical reader may object that we have not quite followed the algorithm
from Section 6, in several ways. We have not speciﬁed an initial handle structureH
for the manifold. Of course we could have done so, and we could have realised the
ﬁrst surface as normal, and we could have decomposedH along it, thereby forming
a new handle structureH2, and so on. Although a computer implementation would
have used handle structures, we have chosen to avoid them in this example, for ease
of exposition.
We deviated from the algorithm in another way, because the second surface is a
union of discs which is separating, whereas the surfaces in Step (6) are required to
be connected and non-separating. However, we could instead have chosen three of
the four discs, and decomposed along of each of these in turn. These are connected
and non-separating. The resulting manifold would have been a single 3-ball. Its
boundary pattern would have been essential, by an application of Lemma 3.2 and
because decomposition along the fourth disc gives an essential pattern. We chose
to decompose along four discs rather than three, again for ease of visualisation and
exposition.
A reader may also object that we have been very fortuitous that we did not need
to leave the hierarchy construction loop. So suppose instead that we had initially
used a slightly diﬀerent set of decomposing surfaces. Suppose that we used the
same ﬁrst surface, but that the second surface was a slightly diﬀerent collection
of discs S2, as shown in (i) of Figure 13. Then when we decompose along these
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 31
(i) The tripus manifold (ii) The first surface in the hierarchy
(iii) The exterior of this surface (iv) Four discs forming the next surface
(v) The top 3-ball (vi) The bottom 3-ball
Figure 12. An essential hierarchy for the tripus manifold
discs, we get two three balls, with boundary patterns as shown in (ii) and (iii). The
pattern in (ii) is inessential; a curve bounding a violating disc D is shown. This
would have been discovered in step (9) of the algorithm. It runs over one of the
discs in S2. When we pattern-compress S2 along D, the result is ﬁve discs, one of
which is boundary-parallel. Removing this from the collection, we obtain the four
discs described in Figure 12 (iv). Hence, the algorithm would again terminate with
the correct declaration that the boundary of the tripus manifold is incompressible.
8. The algorithm to determine incompressibility
In this section, we complete the proof of Theorem 1.1.
Lemma 8.1. LetS be a compact orientable surface properly embedded in a compact
orientable 3-manifold M. Let D be a compression disc for ∂M that is disjoint from
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 32
(i) An alternative collection of four discs
(ii) The top 3-ball (iii) The bottom 3-ball
violating disc
forming the second surface of a
hierarchy for the tripus manifold
Note that the top 
left disc is different 
from the one in the 
previous hierarchy
boundary of a
Figure 13. An alternative decomposing surface. A curve bound-
ing a violating disc is shown.
S. Then S is incompressible inM if and only if it is incompressible inM\\D. Also,
S is boundary-incompressible in M if and only if it is boundary-incompressible in
M\\D.
Proof. One direction is clear. A compression or boundary-compression disc for S in
M\\D can be slid oﬀ the copies of D in∂(M\\D). It then becomes a compression
or boundary-compression disc for S in M.
Suppose thatD′ is a compression or boundary-compression disc forS inM. The
intersection between this andD is a collection of simple closed curves and properly
embedded arcs. Consider a simple closed curve that is innermost in D. It bounds
a disc in D. We may surger D′ along this disc, and remove the resulting 2-sphere
component. The result is a new compression or boundary-compression disc for S
that intersects D a fewer number of times. Hence, we may assume that D∩D′
contains no simple closed curves. When D′ is a compression disc, this implies that
D∩D′ =∅, since if there were an arc of intersection, its boundary would lie in S,
whereas D is assumed to be disjoint from S. So suppose that D′ is a boundary-
compression disc for S. Now consider an arc of D′∩D that is outermost in D. It
separates oﬀ a sub-disc inD with interior disjoint fromD′. We may surgerD′ along
this disc, giving two discs D′
1 andD′
2. One of these is a boundary-compression disc
forS. Hence, again by minimising |D∩D′|, we may assume that D∩D′ =∅. But
then D′ lies in M\\D, and it forms a compression or boundary-compression disc
for S in M\\D. □
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 33
Theorem 8.2 (Determining incompressibility and boundary-incompress-
ibility). There is an algorithm that takes, as its input a compact orientable irre-
ducible 3-manifold M and a compact orientable properly embedded surface S, and
determines whetherS is incompressible and boundary-incompressible. Furthermore,
whenS is compressible or boundary-compressible, the algorithm outputs a compres-
sion disc or a boundary-compression disc.
Proof. We may remove the disc components of S without aﬀecting whether S is
compressible or boundary-compressible. So suppose that S has no disc components.
GiveM the empty boundary pattern, and letP be the pattern thatM\\S inherits.
Running the algorithm provided by Theorem 1.3 on (M\\S,P ) establishes whether
P is essential. Furthermore, when it is inessential, the algorithm provides a violating
disc.
First suppose that P is essential. Then S is incompressible and boundary-
incompressible, by Lemma 3.2. Hence, in this case, our algorithm terminates with
the declaration that S is incompressible and boundary-incompressible.
Now suppose that P has a violating disc D. Then ∂D intersects P an even
number of times, since P is where the copies of S in ∂(M\\S) meet the parts of
the boundary coming from ∂M . So, ∂D intersects P zero times or twice. If ∂D
intersects P twice, then D forms a potential boundary-compression disc for S. If
this is an actual boundary-compression disc, then the algorithm terminates and
provides this disc. On the other hand, if D∩S separates oﬀ a subdisc D′ from
S, then D∪D′ yields a violating disc for P that is disjoint from P . So we may
suppose that ∂D is disjoint fromP . It then lies in a copy of S or in∂M\\S. In the
former case, D is a compression disc for S. Suppose that D lies in ∂M\\S. If it
forms a compression disc for ∂M , then we cut M alongD and by Lemma 8.1, S is
compressible or boundary-compressible in M\\D if and only if it was beforehand.
Thus, we can work with this new manifold, which has boundary with higher Euler
characteristic. Suppose that D is not a compression disc for ∂M . Then ∂D bounds
a discD′ in∂M . The boundary of S must intersect this disc, since D is a violating
disc. Pick an innermost curve of ∂S∩D′ inD′. This bounds a disc in D′ that forms
a compression disc forS, since we are assuming thatS has no disc components. □
Theorem 8.3 (Determining incompressibility) . There is an algorithm that
takes, as its input, a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold M and a compact
orientable properly embedded surface S, and determines whether S is incompress-
ible. Furthermore, when S is compressible, the algorithm outputs a compression
disc.
Proof. Again we may assume that S has no disc components. Give M the empty
boundary pattern, and let P be the pattern that M\\S inherits. Now replace
each curve of P by two parallel curves, forming a new pattern P′. The algorithm
given in Theorem 1.3 is then applied to ( M\\S,P′). If P′ is essential, then S is
incompressible and the algorithm terminates with this declaration. So suppose that
P′ has a violating disc D. The boundary of M\\S consists of parts coming from
S and parts coming from ∂M , and between these lie annuli lying between parallel
curves of P′. Hence, ∂D intersects P′ an even number of times. Moreover, if it
intersects P′ twice, then one arc of ∂D\\P′ is boundary parallel in an annular
component of ∂(M\\S)\\P′. In that case, we may isotope ∂D to form a violating
disc disjoint from P′. So we may assume that D is disjoint from P′. It either
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 34
forms a compression disc for S or it is disjoint from S. In the former case, the
algorithm terminates and provides this disc D. In the latter case, it either forms
a compression disc for ∂M , in which case we compress along it and continue, or it
can be used to ﬁnd a compression disc for S lying in ∂M . □
9. The number of steps
There are various steps in the algorithm from Theorem 1.3 that are not described
with enough precision to be able to estimate their running time. So, we will initially
content ourselves with an analysis of the number of times that the algorithm goes
through any of the steps in Section 6. We do this in terms of two quantities:
(1) the maximal length L of any of the hierarchies; thus the variable ℓ will be
at most L throughout;
(2) the maximal pattern-complexity g of any decomposing surface.
At present, we will not attempt to bound these two quantities. But we can bound
the number of steps in the algorithm in terms of L and g.
When the algorithm is in the hierarchy construction loop, namely Steps (2)-(8),
it continues until a violating disc is found or until it reaches a manifold Mℓ+1 with
b1(Mℓ+1) = 0. The number of times it can iterate this loop is at most L. By
this stage, we have produced a list of surfaces S1,...,S ℓ with pattern-complexity
χp(S1),...,χ p(Sℓ). It may be the case that the ﬁnal surfaceSℓ has negative pattern-
complexity, in which case it is a violating disc (because it is assumed to be connected
and non-separating), and we do not include it in this list. The algorithm then
proceeds through the surface simpliﬁcation process, namely Steps (9)-(15). If it
does not terminate here, then we pattern-compress or compress someSj and thereby
reduce its pattern-complexity by at least one. We discard the later surfaces and
return to Step (7) to create new ones.
In order to ﬁnd an upper bound on the number of times we can leave the hierarchy
construction loop, we deﬁne the (g,L )-complexity of the hierarchy S1,...,S ℓ to be
ℓ∑
i=1
χp(Si)(g + 1)L−i.
In other words, we extend the list χp(S1),...,χ p(Sℓ) to one of length L by adding
zeroes, and then we view this L-tuple of integers as the digits of a number in base
g + 1. This number is the ( g,L )-complexity. Importantly, it goes down by at
least one between successive occasions where we leave the hierarchy construction
loop. This is where we compress or pattern-compress a surface Sj and we discard
the later surfaces beyond Sj. When new ones are created to replace them, all we
have is an upper bound of g on their pattern-complexity. Thus, the L-tuple of
pattern-complexities might change as follows:
(χp(S1),...,χ p(Sj),χ p(Sj+1),...,χ p(SL))−→(χp(S1),...,χ p(Sj)− 1,g,...,g ).
But if we view theseL-tuples as the digits of a number in baseg+1, we see that this
number has gone down by at least 1. Since the (g,L )-complexity is never more than
(g + 1)L, we deduce that the number of times we leave the hierarchy construction
loop is at most (g + 1)L. Hence, the number of times that we perform any step of
the algorithm is at most L(g + 1)L. The extra factor L is because we may go round
the hierarchy construction loop at most L times before leaving it. We summarise
this as follows.
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 35
Proposition 9.1 (Number of iterations) . The number of times that the above
algorithm can iterate through any step is at most L(g +1) L, whereL is the maximal
length of any of the hierarchies and g is the maximum pattern-complexity of any of
the surfaces.
10. A refined algorithm using interior parallelity bundles
We saw in Proposition 9.1 that the quantity L, which provides an upper bound
to the length of any of the partial hierarchies that we construct, is key to control-
ling the running time of the algorithm. With our current algorithm, it is not so
straightforward to give good estimates onL. This is because the proof at the end of
Section 5 that the hierarchies terminate uses the ordered pairs ( cq(H),m (H)). Al-
though lexicographical ordering on these pairs is enough to establish termination,
it does not establish how quickly this happens. Now under many circumstances
cq(H) strictly decreases. The quantity m(H) only becomes relevant when H has a
non-separating vertical surface in its interior parallelity bundle. Therefore, in this
section, we show how we may remove every component of the interior parallelity
bundle that is not an I-bundle over a disc. This will lead to a somewhat more
complicated algorithm. But it will mean that we can provide a linear bound on
L in terms of the initial q-complexity of H. The ﬁrst change that we make to the
algorithm is as follows.
First modiﬁcation to the algorithm : After Step (2), once the handle structure has
been made admissible, we then do the following:
(2′) Replace each component of the interior parallelity bundle that is an I-
bundle over a disc by a single 2-handle.
(2′′) Cut along the vertical boundary components of the remainingI-bundles and
further decompose these using squares into 3-balls with essential boundary
patterns.
This ensures that the resulting 3-manifold has interior parallelity bundle that
consists solely of 2-handles and hence cannot contain a non-separating vertical sur-
face. Therefore, by Proposition 5.9, the q-complexity cq(Hi) of the handle structure
Hi strictly decreases when we decompose along a connected non-separating normal
surface Si.
However, this algorithm has an extra complication. In the previous algorithm
described in Section 6, if a non-trivial square was found to be pattern-compressible,
this led to a violating disc. This is in turn was used to simplify an earlier surface
in the hierarchy. Hence, pattern-compressed squares never survive in the hierarchy.
But what about the annuli that are used in step (2′′)? What if these are compressed
or pattern-compressed? We now explain how to deal with this situation.
Proposition 10.1 ((Pattern-)compressible vertical boundary). LetM be
a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold other than a 3-ball, and let P be a
boundary pattern for M. Let H be an admissible handle structure for (M,P ). Let
B be a component of the interior parallelity bundle B that is not an I-bundle over
a disc, and let A be a vertical boundary component of B. Suppose that A has a
pattern-compression or compression discE. Then there is an algorithm that, given
H,A andE, either creates a handle structure for (M,P ) with smaller q-complexity
or produces a violating disc for (M,P ).
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 36
Proof. Suppose ﬁrst that E is a pattern-compression disc. Pattern-compress A
along E to form a properly embedded disc D. If this is a violating disc, then the
algorithm produces this disc and stops. So, suppose that D is not violating. Its
boundary therefore bounds a disc D′ in ∂M that intersects P either in the empty
set or a single arc. Since M is irreducible, D∪D′ bounds a 3-ball in M. If the arc
D∩∂M is disjoint from D′, then we deduce that A is parallel to an annulus A′ in
∂M that intersects P either in the empty set or a single core curve. On the other
hand, if D∩∂M lies in D′, then we deduce that A is compressible. Indeed one of
the discs of D′\\∂A forms a compression disc for A when pushed a little into the
interior of M. We will later examine the case where A is compressible, and so we
now suppose that A is parallel to the annulus A′.
Consider ﬁrst the case where the solid torus between A and A′ contains B.
Then we remove this solid torus from the handle structure, thereby removing this
component of B and possibly others. If A′ contained a core curve of P , then we
transfer this across to A. This has the eﬀect of replacing some components of
F 0(H) and F 1(H) by an arc of P , which does not increase the q-complexity of
H. Moreover, the solid torus cannot be an entire component of B, and so it must
contain a 0-handle of H of positive index. So removing this solid torus strictly
reduced cq(H).
So, suppose that the interior of B is disjoint from this solid torus. If B is an
I-bundle over a disc, then this implies that M is a 3-ball which is contrary to one
of the hypotheses of the proposition. Suppose that B is an I-bundle over a surface
F with a single boundary component other than a disc. This then contains a non-
separating essential arc. The I-bundle over this arc, together with two meridian
discs for the solid torus, forms a violating disc for ( M,P ). Suppose now that B is
an I-bundle over a surface with more than one boundary component. Pick an arc
in the base surface with exactly one endpoint on the boundary component that this
the image of A. Let A′′ be the vertical boundary component incident to the other
endpoint of this arc. The I-bundle over this arc, together with a meridian disc for
the solid torus, gives a pattern-compression disc for A′′. If we pattern-compress
along this disc and we create a violating disc, then the algorithm outputs this. If it
does not create a violating disc, then again there are two cases. It might lead to a
compression disc for A′′, which we will consider later. If not, then A′′ is parallel to
an annulus in∂M intersectingP either in the empty set or a single core curve. But
now the region between A′′ and this annulus contains B. Hence, we may remove
this solid torus, thereby removing B from the handle structure.
We now consider the case where A has a compression disc E. This compresses
D to two discs D1 and D2. If one of ∂D1 or ∂D2 does not bound a disc in ∂M ,
thenD1 orD2 is violating, and the algorithm outputs this disc. So we may suppose
that D1 and D2 are parallel to discs D′
1 and D′
2 in ∂M . It may be that D′
1 and
D′
2 are nested, in which case suppose that D′
1⊂D′
2. It may also be the case that
D′
1 contains boundary components of ∂hB other than ∂D′
1. But by changing our
choice ofA if necessary, we may assume that this is not the case. If one ofD′
1 orD′
2
has non-empty intersection with the pattern, it forms a violating disc. So, suppose
that D′
1 and D′
2 are disjoint from the pattern.
The ﬁrst case we consider is where D′
1 and D′
2 are disjoint. Then D′
1∪A∪
D′
2 bounds a ball. This ball does not contain B because ∂hB has no boundary
components in D′
1, and B is not an I-bundle over a disc. We may modify the
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 37
handle structure in the ball by declaring that it is a single interior parallelity 0-
handle. This reduces the q-complexity of the handle structure.
Suppose now that D′
1 andD′
2 are nested. Then D′
1 lies withinD′
2, by our earlier
assumption. The fact that B is not an I-bundle over a disc imply that the interior
of∂D′
1 is disjoint from B. Hence, B lies in the region between A andD′
2\\D′
1. We
remove this region from the handle structure. This reduces the q-complexity of the
handle structure. □
Thus, the algorithm in Section 6 is also modiﬁed as follows.
Further modiﬁcation to the algorithm : In Step (13), we again consider a violating
discD. This forms a pattern-compression disc for some surface Sj in the hierarchy.
IfSj is a square, then this creates a new violating disc. IfSj is the vertical boundary
of the interior parallelity bundle forHj, we apply the algorithm in Proposition 10.1.
This either produces a violating disc or it simpliﬁesHj. In all other cases, we apply
Lemma 3.6 to create a non-separating connected orientable surface Sj with smaller
pattern complexity. We discard the rest of the hierarchy, and then proceed to Step
(14).
Proposition 10.2 (The reﬁned algorithm works). LetM be a compact orientable
irreducible 3-manifold, and letP be a boundary pattern. The above algorithm termi-
nates with the correct declaration either that P is essential or that P is inessential.
Moreover, the length of any of the partial hierarchies produced by the above algo-
rithm is at most 4cq(H).
Proof. As in the proof of Theorem 6.1, it is clear that if the algorithm terminates,
then its output is correct.
We start by bounding the length of the partial hierarchies that the algorithm
produces. Therefore consider one such partial hierarchy S1,...,S ℓ, and let Hi be
the handle structure on for the manifold (Mi,P i) containingSi. We will show that
cq(Hi+4)<c q(Hi) for each i. This will establish that ℓ≤ 4cq(H).
Certainly, cq(Hi+1)≤ cq(Hi) by Proposition 5.9 and Lemma 5.11. We must
show that at least every 4 steps, this quantity strictly decreases. To establish this,
we examine carefully how the algorithm works.
The ﬁrst thing that the algorithm does is to make the initial handle structure
admissible, using Create admissible handle structure in Proposition 5.4. It
then modiﬁes the handle structure to ensure that the interior parallelity bundle is
just I-bundles over discs, or it ﬁnds a violating disc.
The algorithm then proceeds by iterating the hierarchy construction loop. At
each stage through the loop, it cuts along a connected non-separating normal sur-
face, then possibly cuts along non-trivial squares to make the handle structure
admissible, then cuts along vertical boundary components of the interior parallelity
bundle and then vertical squares. After this stage, the interior parallelity bundle
again consists of I-bundles over discs.
If at any stage, the algorithm leaves the hierarchy construction loop and does not
immediately terminate, it ﬁnds a compression disc or pattern-compression disc for
someSj. When this Sj is a connected non-separating normal surface, a component
of the resulting surface is non-separating and it is normalised, and we work instead
with that surface. On the other hand, when Sj is a square or the vertical boundary
components of the interior parallelity bundle, then Sj is either used to produce a
further violating disc or it is used to simplify the handle structure; in both cases,
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 38
it is discarded. Hence, in the list of surfaces S1,...,S ℓ, either our given Si is
connected, normal and non-separating, or this is true for some Sj with j≤ i + 3.
Therefore, cq(Hi+4)<c q(Hi), as claimed.
We now show that the algorithm terminates. At the ith stage, let (Si
1,...,S i
ℓ(i))
be the partial hierarchy that is currently stored. As in the proof of Theorem 6.1, the
surface Si
1 must eventually stabilise at some surface S1. This is because each time
thatSi
1 is modiﬁed, eitherχp(Si
1) decreases (when a pattern-compression or pattern
compression is performed) or the q-complexity of the handle structure containing
Si
1 is reduced (as in (Pattern-)compressible vertical boundary ). We then
consider the next surfaces Si
2. Again they eventually stabilise at some surface S2.
This is for the same reason as above, plus the observation that when Si
2 is used
to create a violating disc, then either this leads to the algorithm terminating or
it is used to reduce the pattern-complexity of a previous surface. However, the
latter case does not arise because we are assuming that Si
1 does not change any
further. Repeating in this way, we create an inﬁnite sequence of surfacesS1,S 2,... .
However, this is impossible because we have just established an upper bound on
the length of any partial hierarchy created by the algorithm. □
11. Handle structures of uniform type
Our algorithm starts with a handle structureH. We then decompose this handle
structure along a sequence of surfaces. Suppose that each of the 0-handles of the
initial handle structureH falls into one of ﬁnitely many ‘types’. For example, if H
had been dual to an ideal triangulation, then for each 0-handle H, its intersection
withF is a thickened version of the complete graph on 4 vertices. If H had been
dual to a triangulation, then for each 0-handle H, H∩F is a thickened version of
a subgraph of the complete graph on 4 vertices. We want to maintain this local
ﬁniteness as we proceed down the hierarchy. In this section, we show how to achieve
this.
Deﬁnition 11.1. Let H and H′ be 0-handles in handle structures H andH′ for
(M,P ) and (M′,P′). We say that they have the same type if there is a homeo-
morphismH→H′ sendingH∩F 0(H) homeomorphically to H′∩F 0(H′), sending
homeomorphicallyH∩F 1(H) toH′∩F 1(H′), and sendingH∩P homeomorphically
to H′∩P′.
Deﬁnition 11.2. We say that a handle structureH has uniform type if there is a
ﬁnite list of handle types such that any 0-handle of H is one of these types.
Of course, this deﬁnition only really makes sense if the list of handle types is
given in advance, and then the requirement that H is of uniform type forces its
0-handles to conform to this list of types. But this slightly imprecise wording is
useful, because it will be convenient occasionally to enlarge our ﬁnite list of types.
An example is given below in Theorem 11.3.
It will be important that we only use handle structures of uniform type. This is
for many reasons. For example, if we wish to write down a normal surface, we will
typically do so using its normal vector, and it is therefore important that we can
list the diﬀerent types of normal disc that can arise within a handle.
The following result ensures that the handle structures in our partial hierarchies
have uniform type.
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 39
Theorem 11.3 (Maintaining uniform type) . LetH be a handle structure of uni-
form type for a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold M with boundary pattern
P . Let H′ be the handle structure of a 3-manifold M′ with boundary pattern P′
obtained fromH by a ﬁnite sequence of the following moves:
(1) decomposition along a normal surface that is disjoint from the interior par-
allelity bundle, no component of which is a boundary-parallel disc, and ap-
plied to an admissible handle structure;
(2) application of Create admissible handle structure in Proposition
5.4;
(3) decomposition along vertical boundary components of the interior parallelity
bundle;
(4) application of (Pattern-)compressible vertical boundary in Propo-
sition 10.1.
ThenH′ is of uniform type, although possibly with a larger set of handle types.
Moreover, when H′ is admissible and its interior parallelity bundle consists of I-
bundles over discs, then for each 0-handle H ofH, there are only ﬁnitely many
possibilities for the following subsets:
(1) the intersection between H and the 0-handles of H′;
(2) H∩F 0(H′);
(3) H∩F 1(H′);
(4) H∩P′,
up to the following operations:
(1) isotopy of H preservingH∩H 1, H∩H 2 and H∩P ;
(2) removing a small collar neighbourhod of a subset of ∂M′;
(3) re-embeddingH′∩H in H in a way that leaves F 0(H′),F 1(H′) and P′∩
∂F(H′) unchanged.
Remark 11.4. Note that we are only claiming fairly limited control over the
location of the 2-handles of H′. We are specifying their attaching locus via H∩
F 0(H′) andH∩F 1(H′), but we do not specify where the remainder of the 2-handles
lie.
The re-embedding of H′∩H might require some further explanation. Suppose
that we had applied a sequence of modiﬁcations to H, giving the handle structure
H′, and then suppose that we made some further modiﬁcations to give another
handle structure H′′. Suppose that H′∩H andH′′∩H diﬀer solely by a Dehn
twist about a disc properly embedded in M′ and lying in H′∩H. Then H′∩H
andH′′∩H would diﬀer by operation (3) above, and so, for the purposes of this
proposition, would be viewed as equivalent.
Proof. We deﬁne a temporary notion of complexity for a 0-handle H of a handle
structure, called t-complexity. It will be a list of three integers. The ﬁrst element of
the triple is the sum of the indices of the components of H∩F with positive index.
The second element is |H∩F 1|. The third element is |H∩F 0|. We compare two
such triples in the usual way, using lexicographical ordering. The set of triples is
then well-ordered.
We will prove by induction on t-complexity that a 0-handle type H gives rise to
only ﬁnitely many handle types ofH′∩H under a sequence of the operations in (1)-
(4) above. Moreover, we will show that the union of the 0-handles of H′∩H with
positive index embed in H in one of only ﬁnitely many ways, up to the equivalence
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 40
described in (1)-(3) at the end of the proposition. This will also establish the second
part of the proposition, because when H′ is admissible and its interior parallelity
bundle consists of I-bundles over discs, then all its 0-handles have positive index.
The induction starts with H having t-complexity (0, 0, 0). Then H is an isolated
0-handle and none of the procedures in (1)-(4) aﬀect it.
We now prove the inductive step. We consider when one of procedures (1)-(4) is
applied to a 0-handle H. We may assume that the result is not a single 0-handle
H′ that is the same type as H and where H′ is obtained from H by removing a
small collar on a subset of ∂H, as in this case there is nothing to prove.
In the procedure Create admissible handle structure , there are three
types of operation that are performed. One type is where we collapse a 1-handle
and 2-handle pair, where the 1-handle has at most two arcs of P running along
it. The eﬀect on H∩F 0 is possibly to remove some components of H∩F 0 with
non-positive index. The eﬀect on H∩F 1 is to remove some components and replace
them by at most two parallel arcs of P∩H. This does not increase the index of
any component of H∩F . If H is modiﬁed, then it reduces at least one of |H∩F 1|
and|H∩F 0|, and it does not increase either of them. There are only ﬁnitely such
modiﬁcations that can be applied to H. Hence, the induction is proved in this case.
The second type of operation in Create admissible handle structure is
the removal of isolated 0-handles ofF with non-positive index. Each such operation
does not aﬀect the index of the other components of F∩ H. It leaves |H∩F 1|
unchanged and it reduces|H∩F 0|. Hence, again the inductive step is proved.
The third type of operation inCreate admissible handle structure is when
there is a simple closed curveC in∂H\\F that intersects the pattern at most three
times. It is assumed that C does not bound a disc in ∂H but that it does bound a
disc in∂M intersectingP in the empty set, an arc or a tripod. When ∂H\\(F∪ P )
is not a union of discs, then C is chosen to be boundary parallel in a component of
∂H\\(F∪ P ) that is not a disc. Hence, in that case, there are only ﬁnitely many
possibilities for C. On the other hand, when ∂H\\(F∪ P ) is a union of discs, then
again there are only ﬁnitely many possibilities for C. Now C bounds a properly
embedded disc D inH, and the operation that is performed is to remove the 3-ball
separated oﬀ byD, and possibly to insert intoD an arc or tripod. The eﬀect of this
onH is to remove some components ofF and to possibly insert some new pattern.
This does not increase the index of the components of H∩F , it does not increase
|H∩F 1|, and it strictly reduces|H∩F 0|. Hence again the inductive step is proved.
The eﬀect when we decompose along vertical boundary components of the in-
terior parallelity bundle is similar to the case of Create admissible handle
structure. The eﬀect is to replace some components of H∩F 1 by two parallel
arcs of H∩P . This leaves index unchanged, but reduces |H∩F 1|. It also removes
some components of H∩F 0 that are disjoint from P and that intersectF 1 in two
arcs, and replaces them by two arcs of P . Again, this leaves index unchanged, and
reduces|H∩F 0|.
In (Pattern-)compressible vertical boundary, submanifolds of the man-
ifold are removed. The eﬀect on H is either to remove it entirely (in which case
there is nothing to prove) or possibly to remove some components of F 1 and re-
place them with an arc of P , and possibly to remove some components of F 0 that
intersectF 1 in two arcs and are disjoint from P , and replace them with an arc of
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 41
P . As argued above, this does not increase the index of any component of F or
|H∩F 0|, and it strictly reduces |H∩F 1|.
We now examine what happens when H is decomposed along a normal surface.
We are assuming that the handle structure is admissible in this case. Hence, every
0-handle of H∩F 0 has non-negative index. So, H has non-negative index. Fur-
thermore, if it has zero index, then it is an interior parallelity handle, and we are
assuming that the normal surface is disjoint from the interior parallelity bundle.
So, we may assume that the index of H is positive.
The normal surface intersects H in discs. We can decompose along these one at
a time. So we focus on one such disc D. Note that there are only ﬁnitely normal
disc types in H. This disc D divides H into two 0-handles H0 and H1, both of
which have non-negative index, by Proposition 5.5. The sum of these indices is
I(H). Hence, if they are both positive, then H0 and H1 have smaller index, and
so we are done by induction in this case. So suppose that one 0-handle H0 has
zero index and the other handle H1 has positive index. Since D is normal, each
component ofF 1∩H is either divided into two by D or lies wholly in one of the
handlesH0 orH1. If one component of F 1∩H ends up wholly in H0, then H1 has
smaller t-complexity than H, and we are again done by induction.
If ∂D lies wholly in F∩ H, then the component of H0∩F incident to ∂D has
zero index and so must be an annulus disjoint from the pattern. Hence, in this
case, H1 is a copy of H and, given H, there are only ﬁnitely many possible types
for H0.
Suppose that ∂D is disjoint from F∩ H. It is therefore properly embedded in
M. Since we are assuming that the decomposing surface has no component that
is a boundary-parallel disc, D must separate components ofF∩ H. Hence, in this
case, H1 has smaller index than H, which is contrary to assumption.
So suppose that ∂D intersectsF∩ H in arcs. These must be boundary-parallel
inF.
Let D′ be the component of ∂H\\∂D lying in H0. This intersects F in n
components, say, each of which is a disc intersecting P twice. Let Γ be the graph
H0∩P . This is a graph where each vertex has degree 1 or 3. The vertices with
degree 1 occur at the points of P∩F inH0, and also at the points ∂D∩P . Let v1
and v3 be the number of vertices with degree 1 and 3 respectively.
α
α
P
D'
β
1
10 α α2
F F
Figure 14. Left: the disc D′ and its intersection with P andF.
Middle: a tree component of Γ disjoint from F. Right: A tree
component of Γ intersectingF at a single point
We claim that no component Γ ′ of Γ is a tree disjoint from F (see Figure 14
middle). A regular neighbourhood of Γ′ inD′ is a disc, and the part of the boundary
of this disc not lying in ∂D′ is a collection of arcs. There must be at least one such
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 42
arc α that is not outermost in D′, in the sense that it does not separate oﬀ a sub-
disc of D′ disjoint from the other arcs and from F. At its endpoints are two arcs
of ∂D\\(P∪F ) lying in the same component of ∂H\\(P∪F ). By the normality
of D, these are therefore the same arc of ∂D\\(P∪F ). Hence, α was outermost
which is a contradiction.
We now show that no component of Γ is a tree intersecting F in a single point
(see Figure 14 right). Suppose that Γ ′ is such a component. Let β be the arc of
∂F\\P incident to Γ′ and that is disjoint from ∂D. Let α be an arc in D′ disjoint
from Γ running from β to ∂D that runs close to Γ ′. We may extend α along ∂F
in two ways to form arcs α1 and α2 properly embedded in D′, each intersecting P
once. Let α1 be the arc that intersects Γ′. The endpoints of α1 lie in components of
∂H\\(F∪ P ) that are incident along an arc of ∂H∩P . So, by (6) in the deﬁnition
of normality, ∂D intersects this arc. By (4), ∂D must run straight between these
two endpoints ofα1, intersectingP and nothing else. We deduce that Γ′ is a single
edge. A similar argument applied to α2 gives that it is also parallel to a sub-arc of
∂D. So, D′∩P consists of two arcs. These must emanate from the same 0-handle
ofF, as otherwise ∂D violates (5) in the deﬁnition of normality. So, we deduce
that D contradicts (7) in the deﬁnition of normality.
We deduce that each component Γ ′ of Γ satisﬁes 2 χ(Γ′)−|F∩ Γ′|≤ 0. So,
v1−v3−|F∩ Γ| = 2χ(Γ)−|F∩ Γ|≤ 0. Now the number of vertices of P∩H1 is
equal to the number of vertices of P∩H, plus|Γ∩∂D|, minus v3. But|Γ∩∂D| =
v1−|F∩ Γ|. We deduce that the number of vertices of the graph P∩H1 is at most
the number of vertices of P∩H.
To summarise, we have shown that in each of the operations (1)-(4), the t-
complexity of H strictly goes down, except possibly in the case of (1). When the
t-complexity does not go down,H is decomposed along the normal disc D, the new
handle H1 has H1∩F an exact copy of H∩F , and the new pattern P′ intersects
H1∩F in the same location that P intersected H∩F . More precisely, there is
a homeomorphism H → H1 takingF 0(H) homeomorphically to F 0(H1), taking
F 1(H) homeomorphically to F 1(H1), and taking P∩F (H) homeomorphically to
P′∩F (H1). This homeomorphism need not take P∩H homeomorphically to
P′∩H1, but we have shown that these graphs have the same number of vertices.
Hence, after a sequence of steps (1)-(4), the t-complexity must go down at some
stage, or the handles run through only ﬁnitely many types. In either case, the
argument is complete. □
Remark 11.5. The above proposition is crucial to the eﬃcient certiﬁcation that a
boundary patternP for a compact orientable 3-manifoldM is essential, as required
by Theorem 1.6. When M is irreducible, this is achieved by giving an essential
hierarchy for (M,P ). Now ( M,P ) is given to us by means of a triangulation T ,
and so Theorem 11.3 guarantees that the resulting handle structures for all the
manifolds in the hierarchy are of uniform type. This is important at many points.
For example, in Proposition 12.1 below, a constant k depends on the type of the
handles. Hence, for all the handle structures that we consider, k is in fact bounded
above by a universal constant independent of M and the hierarchy.
Another crucial conclusion from Theorem 11.3 is that when the handle structure
H′ for a manifold in our hierarchy is admissible and its interior parallelity bundle
consists of I-bundles over discs, then the intersection between the 0-handles of H′
and any tetrahedron ofT is one of only ﬁnitely many types, where again this list of
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 43
types is universal. In particular, the number of 0-handles of H′ is bounded above
by a universal constant times the number of tetrahedra of T . This is important
because many quantities depend on |H′|, for example again in Proposition 12.1. It
is also central to the eﬃciency of our algorithm. For example, when a manifold in
the hierarchy is created and all its boundary components are 2-spheres, then we
need to examine whether the boundary pattern in these 2-sphere is essential. We
can do so eﬃciently, since the handle structure on this manifold has uniform type
and its number of handles is bounded above by a universal constant times |T| .
Theorem 11.3 is an analogue of results known for sutured manifold hierarchies
(see [13, Proposition 6.3] and [16, Theorem 6.1]).
12. Fundamental decomposing surfaces
Our goal in this section is to control the extended weight of our decomposing
surfaces.
Proposition 12.1 (Extended weight bound). LetM be a compact orientable irre-
ducible 3-manifold, other than a 3-ball, with non-empty boundary and an essential
boundary pattern P . Let H be a handle structure of (M,P ) of uniform type. Then
there is a constant k (depending only on the handle types of H) with the following
property. There is a compact orientable connected non-separating normal surface S
properly embedded in M with smallest pattern complexity among all such surfaces
and with extended weight at most k|H|.
Our proof of this fact relies heavily on work of Tollefson and Wang [21]. A fairly
minor complication is that they worked with triangulations rather than handle
structures. Starting from H, it is straightforward to build a triangulation T of M
in which P is simplicial, satisfying the following conditions:
(i) the number|T| of tetrahedra is at mostc1|H|, wherec1 is a constant depending
only on the handle types of H;
(ii) any incompressible, pattern-incompressible normal surface S inT can be iso-
toped, leaving P invariant, to form a standard surface in H with extended
weight at most c2w(S), where w(S) is the weight of S inT and c2 is a con-
stant depending only on the handle types of H.
Hence, we now work with a triangulation T satisfying these conditions.
We now recall the projective normal solution space associated withT . There are
7|T| types of normal triangles and squares in T . We assign a variable xi to each
type. When S is a normal surface, these variables count the number of triangles
and squares of each type in S, giving a list of 7 |T| non-negative integers for S
called its normal surface vector and denoted (S). Such vectors satisfy a system of
linear constraints called the matching equations. There are three such equations for
each face ofT with tetrahedra on both sides. For each such face, the triangles and
squares in the tetrahedron on one side of the face must patch together correctly
with the triangles and squares in the tetrahedron on the other side. The triangles
and squares on one side intersect the face in normal arcs, which come in three
diﬀerent types. The matching equations assert that for each such normal arc type,
the number of triangles and squares on one side intersecting the face in arcs of
that form is equal to the number of triangles and squares on the other side also
intersecting that face in arcs of that form. The projective normal solution space is
the subset of R7|T| subject to the matching equations, the conditionsxi≥ 0 for each
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 44
i, and the equation ∑xi = 1. It is a convex compact polyhedron. Each normal
surface S determines a point in the projective normal solution space by scaling all
its co-ordinates xi so that∑xi = 1. The unique closed face of minimal dimension
in the projective normal solution space containing this point is called the face that
carries S and is denoted CS.
A normal surface is said to be the normal sum of two properly embedded normal
surfacesG andH if its normal vector is (G)+(H). We denote the surface byG+H.
One cannot always form the normal sum of two normal surfaces, but this is possible
if they are both carried by the same face of the projective normal solution space.
A normal surface is said to be fundamental if it cannot be written as the normal
sum of two non-empty normal surfaces.
Deﬁnition 12.2. A compact oriented incompressible pattern-incompressible sur-
face S properly embedded in (M,P ) is said to be p-taut if the following all hold:
(1) [S,∂S ] is non-trivial in H2(M,∂M );
(2) S minimises pattern-complexity in its homology class;
(3) there is no homologically trivial union of components of S.
We say thatS is lw-p-taut if it is p-taut and it has minimal weight among all p-taut
surfaces representing [S,∂S ].
This is an analogue of a deﬁnition of Tollefson and Wang [21, Section 1]. Instead
of pattern-complexity, their surfaces minimisedχ−, which is deﬁned to be the sum,
over all components S′ of S, of max{0,−χ(S′)}. Their surfaces were known as
lw-taut.
The following is an analogue of Theorem 3.3 of [21], but with their lw-taut
surfaces replaced by lw-p-taut surfaces. The proof is essentially the same, and is
omitted.
Theorem 12.3. LetM be a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold withb1(M)>
0 and letP be an essential boundary pattern. LetT be a triangulation ofM in which
P is simplicial. Let S be a compact oriented incompressible pattern-incompressible
properly embedded surface that is lw-p-taut. Let CS be the face of the projective
normal solution space that carries S. Then every surface G carried by CS inherits
an orientation and so represents an element [G]∈H2(M,∂M ). With this orienta-
tion, G is lw-p-taut. Moreover, for any two surfaces G and H carried by CS, the
normal sum G +H satisﬁes [G +H] = [G] + [H].
Hence, we have the following result.
Theorem 12.4 (Fundamental surface). LetM be a compact orientable irreducible
3-manifold with b1(M)> 0 and let P be an essential boundary pattern. Let T be a
triangulation of M in which P is simplicial. Then there is a fundamental normal
surfaceS properly embedded inM satisfying the following:
(1) S is a compact connected orientable surface that is non-separating in M;
(2) S has smallest pattern-complexity among all surfaces satisfying (1).
Proof. Pick a compact orientable surface S satisfying (1) and (2) above. Such a
surface exists because b1(M) > 0. We may assume that it is incompressible and
pattern-incompressible, by Corollary 3.7. Hence it can be isotoped, via an isotopy
preserving the pattern, to a normal surface, also called S. We may further assume
that S has least weight among all such surfaces. So it is lw-p-taut. Let CS be the
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 45
face that carries S. Suppose that S is not fundamental. Then S can be written as
a non-trivial normal sum G +H of normal surfaces G andH. We may assume that
G is connected, since if G1 is any component of G, then S =G1 + ((G−G1) +H).
Both G and H lie in CS. By Theorem 12.3, G and H inherit orientations which
make them lw-p-taut. In particular, G is non-separating in M. Neither G nor H
has negative pattern-complexity, since we are assuming that P is essential. Note
that pattern-complexity and weight are both additive under normal summation.
Hence, the pattern-complexity of G is at most that of S. But it has smaller weight,
contrary to our assumption. □
Proof of Proposition 12.1. We are given a handle structureH of (M,P ) of uniform
type. From this, construct a triangulation T of M in which P is simplicial and
satisfying (i) and (ii) above. By Theorem 12.4, there is a fundamental normal
surface S properly embedded in M satisfying (1) and (2) in the theorem. By a
result of Hass, Lagarias and Pippenger [5, Lemma 6.1], the weight of S inT is at
most|T| 227|T| +7. Hence, S is isotopic, leaving P invariant, to a standard surface
S inH with extended weight at most c2|T| 227|T| +7. Then by Lemma 4.11, S
can be isotoped, leaving P invariant, to be normal in H and without increasing
its extended weight. Since, |T|≤ c1|H|, we obtain our required constant k and
exponential bound on the extended weight of S. □
13. Certifying an inessential pattern
In this section, we establish one part of Theorem 1.6, by showing that Essen-
tial boundary pattern is in co-NP. In the case where the given 3-manifold is
irreducible, this is a consequence of the following result, which we will prove in this
section.
Theorem 13.1 (Fundamental violating disc). Let M be a compact orientable ir-
reducible 3-manifold with a boundary pattern P . LetT be a triangulation for M in
whichP is simplicial. If P is inessential, then it has a violating disc that is normal
and fundamental.
The following result provides a violating disc in an important special case.
Theorem 13.2 (Fundamental compression disc). Let M be a compact orientable
irreducible 3-manifold with pattern P . Let T be a triangulation for M in which
P is simplicial. If ∂M\\P is compressible, then it has a compression disc that is
normal and fundamental.
This result was proved in [18, Theorem 4.1.13]. Although that theorem does
not explicitly assert that the compression disc is fundamental, this is established
in the proof. So, in our proof of Theorem 13.1, we may assume that ∂M\\P is
incompressible. In the terminology of Matveev [18], this means that ( M,P ) is
boundary-irreducible.
We recall some of the standard terminology from normal surface theory. Let S
be a normal surface that is the normal sum of two surfaces S1 and S2. We may
pattern-isotope one of the surfaces, preserving its normality throughout, so that
afterwards S1 and S2 intersect transversely in a collection of simple closed curves
and properly embedded arcs. Then each component of S1\\S2 and S2\\S1 is a
patch. It is a clean disc patch if it is a disc that is disjoint from the pattern and is
either disjoint from ∂M or intersects ∂M in a single arc.
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 46
A summation S = S1 + S2 is in reduced form if there do not exist normal
surfaces S′
1 and S′
2 where each S′
i is pattern-isotopic to Si, and S =S′
1 +S′
2, with
|S′
1∩S′
2|<|S1∩S2|.
Let S be a compact surface properly embedded in M. A clean boundary-
compression disc forS is a disc embedded in M such that∂D is the concatenation
of two arcs α and β, where
(1) α =D∩S does not separate oﬀ a disc from S that is disjoint from P ;
(2) β =D∩∂M is disjoint from P .
WhenS has no clean boundary-compression disc, it is said to be cleanly boundary-
incompressible.
Note that a violating disc that intersects P as few times as possible is cleanly
boundary-incompressible.
WhenS is a normal sum of two normal surfacesS1 andS2 in general position, it
is well known (see for example [18, Section 3.2.2]) thatS is obtained fromS1∪S2 by
resolving the intersectionsS1∩S2 as follows. A regular neighbourhood of S1∩S2 is
removed fromS1 andS2. This regular neighbourhood is a collection of discs, annuli
and M¨ obius bands. At each component of S1∩S2, a pair of discs or annuli are
inserted, lying in a regular neighbourhood of that component of S1∩S2. These are
known as trace discs and annuli. This procedure is called a switch. There are two
possible ways to perform a switch. Only one choice of switch at each component
of S1∩S2 leads to the normal surface S. These are called regular switches. The
other type of switch is an irregular switch. If a switch is made at each component
ofS1∩S2 and at least one of these switches is irregular, then the resulting surface
S′ admits a disc D in some face of T , such that D∩S′ is an arc in ∂D, and the
remainder of ∂D lies in an edge of T . When D is disjoint from ∂M , this leads
to an isotopy that reduces the weight of S′. When D intersects ∂M but not P ,
then it is a potential clean boundary-compression disc for S′. If it is not a clean
boundary-compression disc then, assuming ∂M\\P is incompressible, there is an
isotopy of S′ leavingP ﬁxed, that reduces its weight. On the other hand, when D
intersectsP , then a small isotopy of D pushing it oﬀ the face makes it a potential
clean boundary-compression disc. There are two possible directions in which to
push D oﬀ the face and if neither direction gives a clean boundary-compression
disc, then, again assuming ∂M\\P is incompressible, S′ must have been a disc
parallel to a disc in ∂M intersecting P in a single arc. This observation leads to
the following result.
Proposition 13.3. Let M be a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold with
pattern P . Let T be a triangulation for M in which P is simplicial. Suppose that
∂M\\P is incompressible. Let S be a compact connected orientable surface that is
incompressible and cleanly boundary-incompressible and that is not a disc parallel
to a disc in ∂M intersecting P in a single arc or the empty set. Suppose that S
is the sum of two normal surfaces S1 and S2 in general position, and that this
summation is in reduced form. Assume also that S has least weight, up to isotopy
that preserves the pattern. Then no component X of M\\(S1∪S2) is a product
region, in the following sense: there is a homeomorphism from X to the product
of a surface and an interval, the homeomorphism taking P∩X, N(S1∩S2) and
∂M∩X to unions of interval ﬁbres.
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 47
Proof. Note that ∂X contains at least one component of S1∩S2, since otherwise S
is not connected. Resolve the intersections betweenS1 andS2 that lie in∂X in such
a way that none of the trace discs and annuli that are inserted are vertical in X.
If all of these switches are regular switches, then the summation was not reduced,
for the following reason. We can remove S1∩X from S1, and then insert S2∩X,
forming a surface S′
1. We can also form S′
2 by removing S2∩X from S2, and then
insertingS1∩X. Then S =S′
1 +S′
2, but|S′
1∩S′
2|<|S1∩S2|. On the other hand,
if not all the switches are regular switches, then we can perform these switches
and then perform regular switches at the remaining components of S1∩S2. The
resulting surface S′ is isotopic to S, via an isotopy preserving the pattern. Since
we are assuming thatS is incompressible and cleanly boundary-incompressible and
not a disc parallel to a disc in the boundary intersectingP in arc, we deduce thatS′
admits an isotopy preserving the pattern that reduces its weight. This contradicts
our minimality assumption. □
The following is [18, Lemma 4.1.8].
Theorem 13.4. LetM be a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold with pattern
P . Let T be a triangulation for M in which P is simplicial. Suppose that ∂M\\P
is incompressible. Let S be a compact orientable normal surface properly embedded
in M, that is incompressible and cleanly boundary-incompressible and that has no
component that is a disc parallel to a disc in ∂M intersectingP in arc or the empty
set. Suppose that S is a sum of two normal surfaces S1 and S2 in general position
and that this summation is reduced. Suppose also that S has minimal weight up
to isotopy preserving the pattern. Then no patch of the summation is a clean disc
patch.
Proof of Theorem 13.1. In the case where ∂M\\P is compressible, then Theorem
13.2 provides a fundamental compression disc. So we may assume that ∂M\\P is
incompressible.
Let D be a violating disc that intersects the pattern as few times as possible.
ThenD is cleanly boundary-incompressible and it is automatically incompressible.
So, by [18, Corollary 3.3.25],D can be isotoped, preserving the pattern, into normal
form without increasing its weight. We may assume that D has least weight among
all normal violating discs that intersect the pattern as few times as possible.
Suppose that D is a normal sum S1 +S2. We may assume that this summation
is in reduced form. By [18, Theorem 4.1.36], neither Si has a component that is
a sphere, projective plane, or a disc intersecting the pattern at most once. Hence,
each Si satisﬁes−χ(Si) +|Si∩P|≥ 0. Note that Euler characteristic and the
number of intersection points with the pattern are both additive under normal
summation. Since χ(D)> 0, then one of S1 orS2 has positive Euler characteristic,
sayS1. Then S1 has a disc component. It must intersect the pattern at least twice.
We may assume thatS1 is connected, by adding any other components ofS1 toS2 if
necessary. Now, S2 must therefore have zero Euler characteristic and intersect the
pattern at most once. Since no component of S2 is a disc intersecting the pattern
at most once, we deduce that every component of S2 has zero Euler characteristic.
Our goal is to show that S1 is a violating disc. Since S1 has smaller weight
than D, this will contradict our earlier minimality assumption. Suppose that, on
the contrary,S1 is a parallel to a disc in ∂M that intersects P in a single arc or a
tripod.
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 48
NowS2 cannot have any closed components, since the intersection between such a
component andS1 would lead to a simple closed curve of S1∩S2 and an innermost
such curve in S1 would create a clean disc patch. So, S2 consists of annuli and
M¨ obius bands.
We claim that each arc ofS1∩S2 is essential inS2. If not, there is an inessential
arc that is outermost in S2. It therefore separates oﬀ a disc D2 in S2. This disc
intersectsP at most once, sinceS2 intersectsP at most once. AlsoD2∩S1 separates
oﬀ a sub-discD1 ofS1 intersectingP at most once. The union of these discs creates
a properly embedded disc in M intersectingP fewer times that D did. Hence, this
disc is parallel to a disc in ∂M intersectingP in the empty set or an arc. But then
D2∪ (S1\\D1) is a violating disc that intersects P at most as many times as D
does and that has smaller weight than D, contradicting our minimality assumption
about D.
We claim that each arc ofS1∩S2 is essential inS2. If not, there is an inessential
arc that is outermost in S2. It therefore separates oﬀ a disc D2 in S2. This disc
intersectsP at most once, sinceS2 intersectsP at most once. AlsoD2∩S1 separates
oﬀ a sub-discD1 ofS1 intersectingP at most once. The union of these discs creates
a properly embedded disc in M intersectingP fewer times that D did. Hence, this
disc is parallel to a disc in ∂M intersectingP in the empty set or an arc. But then
D1 and D2 cobound a product region as in Proposition 13.3, contradicting that
proposition.
Hence, S2\\S1 consists of squares. Each square has boundary consisting of two
arcs in S1 and two arcs in ∂M . At least one square is in the ball bounded by S1
and every such square is boundary-parallel in the ball. Consider an outermost such
square. It is parallel to a square in S1. But the resulting product region contradicts
Proposition 13.3.
Thus, we have shown that S1 and S2 cannot intersect, which is impossible,
because S is connected. So S must have been fundamental. □
We now complete the proof of Theorem 1.6. We are given a triangulation T of
a compact orientable 3-manifold M, with boundary pattern P that is simplicial.
When P is inessential, we need to provide a certiﬁcate that conﬁrms this and that
can be veriﬁed in polynomial time as function of t =|T| , the number of tetrahedra.
When M is irreducible, Theorem 13.1 shows that there is a violating disc D that
is fundamental. This is the required certiﬁcate. The algorithm of Agol, Hass and
Thurston [1] can be used to verify that D is indeed a disc intersecting the pattern
at most 3 times. Also, by [16, Theorem 9.4], one can check whether ∂D bounds a
disc in ∂M . If there is no such disc, then D is violating. So suppose that ∂D does
bound a disc D′ in∂M . It may be the case ∂D bounds two discs, in which case we
consider them both in turn. Again using [16, Theorem 9.4], one can check whether
each component of D′\\P is a disc intersecting ∂D′ in one arc and with at most
one vertex of P in its boundary. Since D is violating, at least one component of
D′\\P is not of this form, and the algorithm provided by [16, Theorem 9.4] will
conﬁrm this.
We need to deal with the general case where M is reducible. Our certiﬁcate for
establishing that P is essential is:
(1) a vector ( S) of a (possibly empty) normal surface S inT with weight at
most 2740t2
; this will in fact be a collection of disjoint embedded spheres;
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 49
(2) a triangulation T′ for a 3-manifold M′ with at most 1000t tetrahedra; this
will beM\\S with a 3-ball attached to each spherical boundary component;
(3) a certicate that M′ has inessential boundary pattern.
We now explain why this certiﬁcate exists. It is proved in [9, Lemma 4] that
there is a maximal collection of disjoint non-parallel normal 2-spheres S inT , none
of which bounds a ball inM, with weight at most 2740t2
. A triangulation for M\\S
with at most 1000t tetrahedra is produced using [16, Theorem 11.4]. Then a coned
3-ball is attached to each spherical boundary component, forming the triangulation
T′ for M′. The copy of P in M′ is essential if and only if P was essential in M,
because any violating disc for P inM′ can be chosen to avoid the attached 3-balls,
and so forms a violating disc in M, and conversely, any violating disc in M can be
chosen to avoid S and so becomes a violating disc in M′. Since we are assuming
that P is inessential, there is a certiﬁcate for ( M′,P ) that establishes this.
The veriﬁcation of the certiﬁcate is straightforward. One checks that S is a col-
lection of 2-spheres, using the Agol-Hass-Thurston algorithm. ThenT′ is produced
using the algorithm in [16, Theorem 11.4]. Finally the certiﬁcate showing that P
is inessential in M′ is checked in the way described above.
14. Certifying an essential hierarchy
In this section, we complete the proof of Theorem 1.6, by showing that Essen-
tial boundary pattern is in NP. Thus, we are given a triangulation T of a
compact orientable 3-manifold M with essential pattern P that is simplicial, and
we must provide a certiﬁcate, veriﬁable in polynomial time, that establishes that
P is indeed essential. We may assume that ∂M is non-empty, as otherwise there
is nothing to prove. Using the techniques at the end of the previous section, it
is not hard to reduce to the case where M is irreducible. We will describe this
reduction in more detail at the end of this section, but for the moment, suppose
that M is irreducible. Then, by Theorem 2.5, we know that ( M,P ) admits an
essential hierarchy. Moreover, the existence of such a hierarchy guarantees that P
is essential. So, our goal is to write down such a hierarchy and prove that it is
essential. We know by Proposition 10.2 that there is such a hierarchy with length
that is linearly bounded in terms of the number of tetrahedra in T . Furthermore,
by Theorem 11.3, the intermediate 3-manifolds have handle structures of uniform
type. However, this only controls the local complexity of each handle, not the total
number of handles. Thus, it is not immediately clear how to encode the handle
structures of these manifolds. Nevertheless, we will establish the following result.
Theorem 14.1 (Eﬃcient encoding of a hierarchy). LetM be a compact orientable
irreducible 3-manifold with a boundary pattern P . Let H be a handle structure for
(M,P ) of uniform type. If (M,P ) admits an essential hierarchy, then there is a
hierarchy for (M,P ) that may be described by an amount of data that is at most
a polynomial function of |H| and this hierarchy can be veriﬁed as essential by a
polynomial-time algorithm. Furthermore, for each decomposition
(Mi,P i)
Si
−→(Mi+1,P i+1)
in this hierarchy, one of the following holds:
(1) Si is connected, orientable and non-separating and has smallest pattern-
complexity among all such surfaces, apart from when M is closed andi = 1,
when S1 may be separating;
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 50
(2) Si is a union of non-trivial squares;
(3) Si is a union of properly embedded incompressible pattern-incompressible
annuli disjoint from the pattern.
Recall that the hierarchy construction loop given in Sections 6 and 10 used the
following steps iteratively (where the numbering is as given there):
(2) Apply Create admissible handle structure .
(2′) Replace each component of the interior parallelity bundle that is an I-
bundle over a disc by a single 2-handle.
(2′′) Cut along the vertical boundary components of the remainingI-bundles and
further decompose these using squares into 3-balls with essential boundary
patterns.
(6) Let S be any connected, non-separating, properly embedded, oriented nor-
mal surface in the resulting 3-manifold.
(8) Assuming that S is not a violating disc, then cut the handle structure along
S.
We can view the iterations of this loop as running in the order (6), (8), (2), (2 ′),
(2′′), after an initial application of (2), (2 ′), and (2′′). The handle structures that
are obtained by repeating this loop can be constructed using the following result.
Proposition 14.2. LetH be a handle structure of uniform type for the compact
orientable irreducible 3-manifold M with essential boundary pattern P . Let S be a
connected properly embedded normal surface inM. Then there is an algorithm that
produces an admissible handle structure that is obtained by applying steps (8), (2),
(2′), (2′′). This runs in polynomial time as a function of the number of handles of
H and the logarithm of the extended weight of S.
It is a consequence of Theorem 11.3 that the handle structure obtained by de-
composingH alongS has uniform type. However, it might have a large number of
handles, when S has very high extended weight. But most handles will be of the
following form.
Deﬁnition 14.3. LetH be a handle structure for the compact 3-manifold M with
boundary pattern P . Let S be a normal surface properly embedded in M. Let
H′ be the induced handle structure on M\\S. Then a handle of H′ is a parallelity
handle for S if it lies between parallel normal discs of S.
Each parallelity handle forS is a copy ofD2×I where (D2×I)∩S =∂D 2×I. We
view this product structure as an I-bundle over D2. The I-bundle structures can
be chosen so they agree on the intersection of any collection of parallelity handles.
Hence, the union of the parallelity handles is an I-bundle, called the parallelity
bundleB for S.
The vertical boundary ∂vB of the parallelity bundle B is a union of annuli.
However, these annuli need not be properly embedded. Instead the intersection
with ∂M is a union of ﬁbres in the bundle. We say that ∂vB\\∂M is the inner
vertical boundary. It is a disjoint union of properly embedded annuli disjoint from
the pattern, and squares in M\\S.
The following result is analogous to [16, Theorems 9.2 and 9.3]. It has essentially
the same proof, which is omitted. The proof relies heavily on the algorithm of Agol,
Hass and Thurston [1].
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 51
Theorem 14.4 (Cutting along a surface) . There is an algorithm that takes,
as its input,
(1) a handle structure H of uniform type, with h handles, for a compact ori-
entable 3-manifold M with boundary pattern P ;
(2) a compact orientable properly embedded normal surface S;
and provides as its output, the following data. If (M′,P′) is the manifold with
pattern obtained by decomposing along S, and B is its parallelity bundle for S,
then the algorithm produces the handle structure that M′\\B inherits, and for each
componentB ofB, it determines:
(1) the genus and number of boundary components of its base surface;
(2) whether B is a product or twisted I-bundle;
(3) the way that ∂vB and M′\\B intersect.
The algorithm runs in time that is bounded by a polynomial in h and the logarithm
of the extended weight of S.
Proof of Proposition 14.2. LetH′ be the handle structure thatM\\S inherits. This
might have too many handles to be written down eﬃciently. Suppose instead that
we are provided by the output of Theorem 14.4. In Proposition 14.2, the next
operation that is applied to H′ is Create admissible handle structure . If B
has any components that are incident to ∂M , then an implementation of Create
admissible handle structure will remove them, for the following reason. Let
B be such a component ofB that is incident to∂M . There must be a 0-handle H of
H′ inB that is incident to∂M . Since H is a parallelity handle forS that is incident
to ∂M , its intersection with F(H′) is a line of 0-handles and 1-handles. Suppose
ﬁrst that there is more than one 0-handle ofF(H′)∩H. Then one such 0-handle D
intersectsP′ in two points and intersectsF 1(H′) in a single arc. Hence, H′ fails to
be admissible. We could perform the operation described in Create admissible
handle structure , which removes from H′ the 1-handle and 2-handle that are
incident to D and transfers arcs of P′ incident to these handle across them. This
1-handle and 2-handle were in B, and we view the new parallelity bundle for S as
obtained fromB by removing these two handles. In this way, we could continue to
shrinkB until it contained no 2-handles. Then B∩F (H′) would consist of squares.
For each such square that is non-trivial, we could decompose along it. For each
square D that is trivial, it is parallel to a disc D′ in ∂M′ that intersects P′ as
shown in Figure 5. We can remove the 3-ball bounded by D∪D′ and transfer the
boundary pattern in D′ across to D. However, there is an alternative approach
which is considerably faster to implement, and which has the same end result. Let
A be a component of ∂vB that is incident to ∂M . Pick a maximal collection of
vertical squares inB with vertical boundary lying in A, none of which is parallel to
subset ofA∩∂M , and no two of which are parallel. If any such square is non-trivial,
we decompose along it. If any component D is a trivial square, then we identify
the disc D′ as in Figure 5 with the same boundary, remove the ball between these
discs and then transfer the boundary pattern in D′ across to D. These operations
decompose B either to a 3-ball or to a collar on ∂vB−A. In the latter case,
we can remove this collar and transfer its boundary pattern to ∂vB−A. This
process can all be completed without knowing the precise handle structure on B,
but instead just the information provided by Theorem 14.4. We repeat this for each
component ofB that is incident to ∂M . The resulting handle structure need not
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 52
be admissible, in which case we perform further operations in Create admissible
handle structure . Initially, this does not aﬀect the interior parallelity bundle.
However, at some point, it may do so. This happens when the vertical boundary
of a remaining component ofB fails to be properly embedded. In that case, we can
again remove this component by decomposing along its interior vertical boundary.
Each of these operations either removes a component of the parallelity bundle for
S, or removes a handle of M′\\B. Hence, it can be completed in polynomial
time, as a function of the number of handles of H. The resulting object is a handle
structureH′′ to which variousI-bundles are attached along their vertical boundary.
The actual result of running Create admissible handle structure is obtained
from this by replacing the I-bundles by a union of parallelity handles in some way
that we do not specify. The interior parallelity bundle for this handle structure
includes these I-bundles but it may also include various other handles of H′′. We
can compute this interior parallelity bundle, and then the steps in (2 ′) and (2′′)
can be completed in polynomial time. Thus we have the algorithm required by
Proposition 14.2. □
The certiﬁcate required by Theorem 1.6 is as follows:
(1) a sequence of handle structures H1,..., Hℓ+1, whereHi is a handle struc-
ture for a 3-manifold Mi with boundary pattern Pi;
(2) for some of the i≤ℓ, a surface Si or Di properly embedded in Mi that is
normal inHi.
These handle structures and surfaces are required to have the following properties:
(1) the initial handle structure H1 is dual to the given triangulation T ;
(2) for each 0-handle H ofH1, the intersection betweenH and the 0-handles of
Hi,F 0(Hi),F 1(Hi) and Pi is one of the possibilities from Theorem 11.3;
(3) each Si and eachDi is normal inHi and has extended weight at mostk|Hi|,
where k is the constant from Proposition 12.1;
(4) when Si is provided, thenHi+1 is obtained fromHi using Proposition 14.2;
(5) when Di is provided, then it is a compression disc or pattern-compression
disc for the vertical boundary of the interior parallelity bundle for Hi, and
thenHi+1 is obtained fromHi by simplifying the handle structure according
to the procedure in (Pattern-)compressible vertical boundary;
(6) when no Di or Si is provided, thenHi+1 is obtained fromHi by applying
Create admissible handle structure , and furthermore the interior
parallelity bundle forHi+1 consists of 2-handles;
(7) the length ℓ of this hierarchy is at most 4cq(H1);
(8) the ﬁnal manifold is a collection of 3-balls with essential pattern and its
handle structure is admissible with interior parallelity bundle consisting of
2-handles.
The existence of the certiﬁcate when M is irreducible and P is essential is es-
tablished as follows. We run the algorithm given in Section 6 with the reﬁnements
from Section 10. In Step (6) of the algorithm in Section 6, we are free to pick
any connected non-separating properly embedded orientable normal surface in the
manifold. We pick one with smallest pattern complexity. Then Proposition 12.1
guarantees that there is such a surface with extended weight at most k|Hi|. Fur-
thermore, since the surface has smallest pattern complexity, Corollary 3.7 ensures
that it is incompressible and pattern-incompressible. Hence, if the algorithm leaves
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 53
the hierarchy construction loop and produces a violating disc, then this must form
a compression or pattern-compression disc for some vertical boundary annulus for
the interior parallelity bundle. This is provided in (5). Note that such a violating
disc can be chosen to be fundamental in a triangulation reﬁning Hi by Theorem
13.1, and hence have extended weight at most k|Hi| inHi. Since M is assumed
to be irreducible and P is essential, the algorithm terminates with an essential hi-
erarchy, giving (8). Furthermore, the length of this hierarchy is at most 4 cq(H1)
by Proposition 10.2, which gives (7). Finally, condition (2) is a consequence of
Theorem 11.3.
We now explain how to verify the certiﬁcate. There are two main aspects to
this. Firstly, we must check that each Hi+1 really is obtained fromHi in the ways
described above. This guarantees that we really do have a partial hierarchy. Sec-
ondly, we must check that the ﬁnal manifold Mℓ+1 is balls with essential boundary
patternPℓ+1. Since the ﬁnal handle structure is admissible with interior parallelity
bundle consisting of 2-handles, Theorem 11.3 implies that its number of handles is
at most a uniform constant times|H1|. Furthermore each of its 0-handles is of uni-
form type. Hence, it is straightforward to verify, in polynomial time, that ∂Mℓ+1
is a collection of spheres and that its pattern Pℓ+1 is essential. This implies that
each decomposing surface is incompressible by Lemma 3.2, and Mℓ+1 is irreducible
by Lemma 3.9. So Mℓ+1 is a collection of balls.
So we now focus on verifying that each Hi+1 is obtained from Hi as above.
Suppose ﬁrst that the normal surfaceSi is given. We simply apply Proposition 14.2
and check that the resulting handle structure is Hi+1. Note that Si has extended
weight at most k|Hi|. Since |Hi| is bounded above by a universal constant times
|H1| by (2) above, we deduce that the algorithm in Proposition 14.2 completes in
polynomial time.
Suppose now that the disc Di is given in Hi. This is a compression disc or
pattern-compression disc for a vertical boundary component Ai of the interior par-
allelity bundle Bi forHi. We may remove Bi fromHi, forming a new handle
structureH′
i containing Di. It is of uniform type and its number of 0-handles
satisﬁes|H′
i|≤|H i|. So we may conﬁrm that Di is a compression disc or pattern-
compression disc for Ai. Then the procedure in (Pattern-)compressible ver-
tical boundary may be implemented in polynomial time and the veriﬁer may
check that the resulting handle structure is Hi+1.
Finally, when neither Di nor Si is given, then the procedure Create admissi-
ble handle structure may be implemented and the veriﬁer can check that the
resulting handle structure is Hi+1.
Thus, the veriﬁer can check that this does give an essential hierarchy for (M,P ).
This completes the proof of Theorem 1.6 in the case where M is irreducible and P
is essential.
We now complete the proof of Theorem 1.6. We need to deal with the general
case where M is reducible. Our certiﬁcate for establishing that P is essential is:
(1) a vector ( S) of a normal surface S inT with weight at most 2 740t2
; this
will in fact be a collection of disjoint embedded spheres;
(2) a triangulation T′ for a 3-manifold M′ with at most 1000t tetrahedra; this
will beM\\S with a 3-ball attached to each spherical boundary component;
(3) a certicate that M′ has essential boundary pattern.
INCOMPRESSIBLE SURF ACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION 54
Parts (1) and (2) of the certiﬁcate are veriﬁed in the same way as in Section
13. One checks that S is a collection of 2-spheres, using the Agol-Hass-Thurston
algorithm. A triangulation for M\\S is produced using [16, Theorem 11.4], and
then a coned 3-ball is attached to each spherical boundary component, forming T′.
The copy of P in M′ is essential if and only if P was essential in M, because any
violating disc forP inM′ can be chosen to avoid the attached 3-balls, and so forms
a violating disc in M, and conversely, any violating disc in M can be chosen to
avoidS and so becomes a violating disc in M′. Now M′ is irreducible. So we have
a certiﬁcate, veriﬁable in polynomial time, that ( M′,P ) is essential.
References
[1] I. Agol, J. Hass, and W. Thurston. The computational complexity of knot genus and spanning
area. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 358(9):3821–3850, 2006.
[2] I. A. Dynnikov. Arc-presentations of links: monotonic simpliﬁcation. Fund. Math., 190:29–76,
2006.
[3] W. Haken. Theorie der Normalﬂ¨ achen.Acta Math., 105:245–375, 1961.
[4] W. Haken. ¨Uber das Hom¨ oomorphieproblem der 3-Mannigfaltigkeiten. I.Math. Z., 80:89–120,
1962.
[5] J. Hass, J. C. Lagarias, and N. Pippenger. The computational complexity of knot and link
problems. J. ACM, 46(2):185–211, 1999.
[6] S. V. Ivanov. The computational complexity of basic decision problems in 3–dimensional
topology. Geom. Dedicata, 131:1–26, 2008.
[7] F. Jaeger, D. L. Vertigan, and D. J. A. Welsh. On the computational complexity of the Jones
and Tutte polynomials. Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. , 108(1):35–53, 1990.
[8] Klaus Johannson. Homotopy equivalences of 3-manifolds with boundaries , volume 761 of
Lecture Notes in Mathematics . Springer, Berlin, 1979.
[9] Simon A. King. The size of triangulations supporting a given link. Geom. Topol., 5:369–398,
2001.
[10] P. B. Kronheimer and T. S. Mrowka. Khovanov homology is an unknot-detector. Publ. Math.
Inst. Hautes ´Etudes Sci., 113:97–208, 2011.
[11] Greg Kuperberg. Knottedness is in NP, modulo GRH. Adv. Math., 256:493–506, 2014.
[12] Marc Lackenby. Three-dimensional manifolds, lecture notes. Available at
https://people.maths.ox.ac.uk/lackenby/, 1999.
[13] Marc Lackenby. Exceptional surgery curves in triangulated 3-manifolds. Paciﬁc J. Math. ,
210(1):101–163, 2003.
[14] Marc Lackenby. The crossing number of composite knots. J. Topol., 2(4):747–768, 2009.
[15] Marc Lackenby. A polynomial upper bound on Reidemeister moves. Ann. of Math. (2) ,
182(2):491–564, 2015.
[16] Marc Lackenby. The eﬃcient certiﬁcation of knottedness and Thurston norm. Adv. Math.,
387:Paper No. 107796, 142, 2021.
[17] Marc Lackenby. Link hyperbolicity is in NP. In preparation, 2026.
[18] Sergei Matveev. Algorithmic topology and classiﬁcation of 3-manifolds , volume 9 of Algo-
rithms and Computation in Mathematics . Springer, Berlin, second edition, 2007.
[19] Peter Ozsv´ ath and Zolt´ an Szab´ o. Holomorphic disks and genus bounds.Geom. Topol., 8:311–
334, 2004.
[20] Sucharit Sarkar and Jiajun Wang. An algorithm for computing some Heegaard Floer homolo-
gies. Ann. of Math. (2) , 171(2):1213–1236, 2010.
[21] Jeﬀrey L. Tollefson and Ningyi Wang. Taut normal surfaces. Topology, 35(1):55–75, 1996.
[22] Friedhelm Waldhausen. On irreducible 3-manifolds which are suﬃciently large.Ann. of Math.
(2), 87:56–88, 1968.
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford,
Woodstock Road, Oxford OX2 6GG, United Kingdom