              Saturated-Lattice Bounds and
              Source-Anchored Primitive Projections
                     Polynomial Raw Epochs in Exact Unknot Recognition

                         A research continuation for the ProveIt project
                 Prepared with ChatGPT; mathematical and integration review invited

                                             8 October 2026


                                                 Abstract
         The maintained ProveIt recognizer supports exact primitive-pair quotients and unit-coordinate
     forest contractions on compressed group presentations. Its current analysis bounds consecutive
     raw phases by recurrences exponential in the phase count. We replace that accounting by a
     global invariant of a frozen source presentation. Selected original exponent-sum rows span the
     complete annihilator of the cumulative monomial quotient; each quotient column is a primitive
     integer kernel vector with disjoint support. Cofactors and Hadamard’s inequality then bound
     every cumulative exponent by (t − 1)(t−1)/2 Lt−1 on a block of t ≥ 2 original generators; singleton
     columns have unit entries. All exponent bit lengths are consequently O(r(B + log(r + 1))),
     independently of raw phase depth. A reachable-versus-allocated circuit analysis shows that even
     the existing raw updater has polynomial total cost throughout such an epoch.
         We also implement a source-anchored kernel which evaluates signed counts and primitive-
     width profiles on one immutable source circuit, rather than repeatedly substituting into historical
     circuits. It includes independent source-bound replay, bounded certificate parsing, an adapter
     seam, 38 passing tests, and reproducible exact audits. Completed audits include 26,037 raw-word
     comparisons and a 64,513-bit cumulative exponent. Paired measurements isolate maintenance
     of supplied schedules; eager materialization is a substantial regression. The results remove a
     raw-depth obligation, not the need to expose useful relations or control representation resets.
     They do not establish general quasi-polynomial unknot recognition, and no complete native
     recognizer integration or difficult-knot speedup is claimed.


Deliverable status. Proved local complexity improvement; standalone exact research implementa-
tion; checked algebraic fixtures; proposed native integration. Not a replacement for source-topology
verification.




                                                     1
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                     ProveIt research note


Contents
1 Research objective and contribution boundary                                                     3

2 The frozen-source epoch model                                                                    4

3 A global lattice invariant                                                                       6

4 Cofactor bounds and their consequences                                                           7

5 Reachable circuits versus historical allocation                                                  9

6 Source-anchored evaluation without historical substitution                                      10

7 Independent replay and the nonabelian safety boundary                                           13

8 Reproducible validation                                                                         14

9 Paired maintenance measurements and a negative result                                           16

10 Integration plan for the maintained repository                                                 17

11 A more precise route to quasi-polynomial recognition                                           18

12 Further research questions and concrete targets                                                19

13 Conclusion                                                                                     20

A Proof of the coherent-width certificate                                                         21

B A worked three-generator epoch                                                                  22

C Package map and reproduction commands                                                           22

Reading guide. Sections 3–5 contain the main proof and the sharpened analysis of the maintained
updater. Section 6 gives the new representation and its bit-complexity contract. Sections 7–9 specify
the independent checker and distinguish completed exact audits from narrowly scoped timings.
Sections 10–12 describe native integration, the conditional global complexity statement, and the
remaining research tasks. The appendices provide the primitive-width proof, a worked example,
and reproduction commands.




                                                 2
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                         ProveIt research note


1     Research objective and contribution boundary
The objective is to advance the actual complexity analysis and implementation of the ProveIt
unknot-recognition program, rather than replace it with a fast but incomplete invariant test. The
particular bottleneck addressed here is the repeated manipulation of compressed group relators after
verified primitive-factor quotients. The repository already has these algebraic moves, source-bound
replay, and an optional producer; the new contribution is a stronger global size argument and a
representation that exploits it.
   The preceding maintained analyses, in synthesis/primitive_projection.tex and synthesis/
primitive_forest.tex, are careful to separate raw phases from normalization and other search
operations [3, 4]. Their bounds are valid upper bounds, but they need not be sharp. In particular,
an inequality of the form Bj+1 ≤ 2Bj + O(1) does not show that a valid execution can double its
exponent bit length at every step. The successive exponents are constrained by a single initial
matrix, and that constraint is absent from the local recurrence.


1.1   What is strengthened

The main theorem proves a polynomial bit-size bound for an entire frozen-source raw epoch. The
permitted operations are consecutive primitive-pair contractions, including disjoint batches and
the leaf-first linearization of unit-coordinate forests. Donors are always the current images of fixed
original relator slots; no arbitrary relator replacement is allowed inside the epoch. Rank falls at
every contraction, but no logarithmic or polylogarithmic bound on the number of phases is needed.
   There are two distinct consequences. First, a sharper analysis applies to the existing raw circuit
updater: current reachable nodes need not double when historical allocated nodes do. Second, a
new source-anchored representation avoids much of the remaining historical rebuilding. The first is
a theorem about a maintained mechanism. The second is implemented here as an isolated research
kernel, not silently installed into the full recognizer.


1.2   Relationship to the general target

A quasi-polynomial unknot-recognition algorithm was announced in 2021, following Lackenby’s UC
Davis lecture [8]. His July 2026 manuscript develops hierarchies and an unknot algorithm; Section 9
does not give running-time bounds for all of its operations, and the discussion still requires control of
hierarchy parameters [9]. The maintained ProveIt program likewise does not claim an implemented
general quasi-polynomial bound [1]. This note addresses a specific algebraic component of that
implementation program, not a replacement proof of the announced geometric algorithm.
    Compressed power-word algorithms provide a broader context for manipulating very large powers
without expansion [11]. We do not import an unproved cost bound for normalization from that
literature. The raw kernel uses integer arithmetic, fixed-source circuit scans, and exact prefix
extrema; it needs no compressed word-equality oracle. Primitive words in rank two have classical
structure [10]; the repository’s coherent-width criterion is reused and proved in the form needed
here.




                                                   3
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                                 ProveIt research note


1.3     Claims ledger

      Claim                                           Status and precise scope
      Global cumulative exponent bound                Proved for frozen-source monomial primitive contrac-
                                                      tions.
      Polynomial total raw-epoch cost                 Proved, including a sharper analysis of the existing raw
                                                      updater.
      Source-anchored pair implementation             Implemented and independently replayed in the supplied
                                                      package.
      Source-anchored forest producer                 Covered by the mathematical reduction; not imple-
                                                      mented as a new forest API here.
      Measured maintenance improvement                Completed on supplied algebraic schedules; discovery
                                                      and replay excluded from timers.
      Whole-recognizer speedup                        Not established by these experiments.
      General quasi-polynomial recognition            Not established; exposure, resets, and complete search
                                                      remain separate obligations.


2      The frozen-source epoch model
Let F (X) be the free group on X = {x1 , . . . , xr }, where r ≥ 1. Actual implementation labels may
be any distinct positive integers. An epoch starts with a fixed presentation

                                        G = ⟨x1 , . . . , xr | R1 , . . . , Rm ⟩.

Each Rj is supplied by a binary straight-line program (SLP): an acyclic circuit whose leaves are
signed generators and whose internal gates concatenate their two inputs. Gate zero represents the
empty word. A root may be repeated, and slots may initially be empty. An SLP represents a literal
word, not its freely reduced equivalence class.
    Write M for the number of frozen source gates, including zero, and

                                         L = max{1, |R1 |, . . . , |Rm |}.

For processing bounds let B ≥ 1 dominate the bit length of the length of every scanned source gate.
If the source is trimmed to the union of its root-reachable gates, one may take B = ⌈log2 (L + 1)⌉.
The supplied snapshot operation performs this trimming. Arbitrary serialized sources may contain
unused gates; then their length metadata must also be charged. Since a binary circuit with M
gates has represented-length bit size O(M ), this qualification does not destroy polynomial input-bit
complexity.

Definition 2.1 (Raw epoch). A raw epoch retains the original relator slots and modifies them only
by a cumulative homomorphism induced by the permitted primitive contractions. A slot used as a
donor is marked deleted and represented by the empty root. Every other slot remains the current
literal image of its original root. There is no intervening arbitrary basis change, nonmonomial
substitution, relator recombination, normalization, or source reset.

   This definition is intentionally narrow. At a normalization or exposure boundary, the producer
may freeze a new source and begin a new epoch, but its construction and size must be charged
separately. Treating a changed source as though it were still the old one would invalidate the matrix
argument below.


                                                           4
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                      ProveIt research note


2.1   A permitted primitive-pair contraction

Suppose a current relator is we , where e ≥ 1, w is primitive in F (a, b), and its signed exponent-sum
vector is (u, v) with uv ̸= 0. Primitivity implies gcd(|u|, |v|) = 1. We use the convention a < b and
reuse the name a for a new quotient generator:

                                   a 7−→ a|v| ,   b 7−→ a−u sgn(v) .                               (1)

The right-hand occurrence of a is not recursively substituted into itself. All other live generators
are unchanged.

Lemma 2.2 (The local quotient). The quotient F (a, b)/⟨⟨w⟩⟩ is infinite cyclic, and (1) realizes it.
Substitution into every retained relator therefore computes the quotient of the complete presentation
by w = 1. If e = 1, this preserves the presented group. If e > 1, it preserves the presented group
whenever that group is torsion-free.

Proof. Since w belongs to a free basis of F (a, b), killing it leaves a free group of rank one. The
character in (1) annihilates w and is onto, because its two image exponents are coprime. It induces
a surjection between two infinite cyclic groups and hence an isomorphism. For e > 1, the already
imposed relation we = 1 implies w = 1 in a torsion-free group. In both cases adding w = 1 changes
no group element’s equality class; rewriting the quotient free group and every remaining relator is a
presentation transformation.

   For a validated classical knot-group source, torsion-freeness is the same source-derived premise
used by the maintained primitive modules [3, 4]. The research API does not infer it from an arbitrary
presentation. Its verifier reports whether proper powers occurred; a caller-supplied Boolean is not a
topological proof.
   Disjoint pairs can be validated against the same pre-batch state and applied simultaneously,
because they affect disjoint free factors. Selected source slots are then tombstoned. Although a
selected donor’s raw image may contain opposite letters, its one-generator exponent is zero, so
deleting precisely that slot is justified. Unselected slots are never dropped by inference.


2.2   Forests and their linearization

A unit-coordinate primitive donor has an equation of the form c = pk with nonzero integer k. Select
at most one parent for each child, and require the dependency graph to be a forest. The maintained
forest operation can substitute all dependencies in one batch [4].

Lemma 2.3 (Forest linearization). A valid unit-coordinate forest batch has a sequential realization
by primitive-pair eliminations that use the same original donor slots, retain the intended anchors,
and yield the same monomial image of each initial generator. Consequently all results below apply
to arbitrary mixtures of pair batches and forest batches within a raw epoch.

Proof. Eliminate a leaf child c first, keeping its parent p. No remaining selected donor has c as its
parent, so none of those donor words changes at that step. Continue leaf-first. Each later selected
donor is therefore still its pre-batch word when used. The image of a vertex is the anchor raised to
the product of edge powers on its path, exactly as in simultaneous forest substitution. Orienting a
cyclic quotient to keep the parent instead of the smaller numerical label changes only generator
naming and possibly its sign; neither affects the bounds.

                                                  5
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                       ProveIt research note


  The acyclic and unit-coordinate hypotheses matter. Overlapping arbitrary primitive pairs need
not present a free factor after simultaneous killing, and cycles are not covered by this argument.


3     A global lattice invariant
Index rows by original generators and columns by current live generators. At every raw state the
cumulative map is monomial:
                                          ki
                                  xi 7−→ zπ(i) , ki ∈ Z \ {0}.                                (2)

Let K ∈ Zr×s record this map: row i has its sole nonzero entry ki in column π(i). For a live
generator z, let Iz = {i : π(i) = z} be its block. All blocks are nonempty and partition X.
    Let A ∈ Zm×r be the source exponent-sum matrix:

                               Aji = signed exponent sum of xi in Rj .

In particular |Aji | ≤ L. Let J be the set of original slots selected as donors so far, and AJ its row
submatrix. This matrix is an analysis object; the producer need not construct it.

Lemma 3.1 (Primitive disjoint columns). For each live block Iz ,

                                         gcd{|ki | : i ∈ Iz } = 1.

In particular, the lattice imZ K is a direct summand of Zr .

Proof. Initially K is the identity. Suppose a contraction merges two primitive columns supported
on disjoint blocks. Formula (1) multiplies one block by |v| and the other by −u sgn(v). The gcd
in their union is gcd(|u|, |v|) = 1; other columns are unchanged. Induction proves the first claim.
A primitive vector on a coordinate block extends to an integral basis of that block. Taking those
extensions independently for all disjoint blocks proves the direct-summand statement.

Lemma 3.2 (Independence of selected source rows). After q individual contractions, s = r − q and

                             AJ K = 0,        |J| = q,       rankQ AJ = q.

Proof. Each selected source word is killed by its contraction, so its exponent row annihilates the
resulting K and every later cumulative map. This gives AJ K = 0.
   For independence, consider the next donor row a and the previous map Kold . The vector
aKold is the current donor’s exponent vector: its two nonzero coordinates are eu and ev. It is
therefore nonzero. Every previous selected row annihilates Kold , so a cannot be in their rational span.
Induction gives rank q. Disjoint batches can be linearized, and forests are covered by Lemma 2.3.

Theorem 3.3 (Saturated kernel identity). At every state in a raw epoch,

                              kerQ AJ = imQ K,           kerZ AJ = imZ K.                           (3)

Moreover the restricted matrix AJ [:, Iz ] has a one-dimensional rational kernel, spanned by the
primitive column (ki )i∈Iz .




                                                    6
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                         ProveIt research note


Proof. The columns of K are independent because they are nonzero and have disjoint support.
Lemma 3.2 gives dim kerQ AJ = r − (r − s) = s, proving the rational identity.
   For the integral identity, take y ∈ kerZ AJ and write y = Kc with c ∈ Qs . On a block Iz ,
yi = cz ki . A Bezout combination of the ki equals one by Lemma 3.1; the same combination of the
integer yi equals cz . Thus cz ∈ Z, proving integrality.
   Finally, a vector in the kernel of AJ [:, Iz ] can be extended by zero outside that block. The rational
identity expresses this extension using the columns of K. Disjoint support forces every other column
coefficient to vanish, so the restricted kernel is exactly the indicated line.

   This is the key source constraint missing from a stepwise length recurrence. It is essential that the
selected rows belong to one fixed source. The argument says substantially more than preservation
of abelianization, but it does not replace the nonabelian primitive-word checks that made the
contractions legitimate in the first place.


4     Cofactor bounds and their consequences
Define                                      (
                                                1,                  t = 1,
                                 ∆t (L) =              (t−1)/2  t−1
                                                (t − 1)        L , t ≥ 2.

Theorem 4.1 (Phase-independent exponent bound). For every raw state and every block Iz of size
t,
                                |ki | ≤ ∆t (L)  (i ∈ Iz ).                                 (4)
Consequently every cumulative exponent has

                                         O(r(B + log(r + 1)))                                          (5)

bits throughout the entire raw epoch. There is no dependence exponential in the number of raw
phases.

Proof. For t = 1, primitivity gives |ki | = 1. For t ≥ 2, choose t − 1 independent rows of AJ [:, Iz ] and
call the resulting matrix C. Theorem 3.3 shows this is possible and that ker C is one-dimensional.
Let
                                           ci = (−1)i+1 det Cbi
be its vector of alternating maximal minors. Laplace expansion gives Cc = 0, and row rank t − 1
ensures c ̸= 0. Dividing c by the gcd of its entries gives the unique primitive integral kernel vector
up to sign. Therefore |ki | ≤ |ci |.
                                                                    √
   Each row of a (t − 1) × (t − 1) minor has Euclidean norm at most t − 1 L. Hadamard’s inequality
bounds its determinant by the product of these norms, giving (4). Taking binary logarithms and
using t ≤ r and log2 L ≤ B proves (5).

    For later bookkeeping fix the convenient common bound
                                                                        
                                 Λ = 8(r + 1) B + ⌈log2 (r + 1)⌉ + 2 .                                 (6)

Constants here are deliberately loose. Cumulative exponents, lengths of substituted source gates,
primitive donor coordinates, and intermediate prefix-height quantities have O(Λ) bits. For example,

                                                       7
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                                    ProveIt research note


a mapped root has length at most L maxi |ki |. A donor’s primitive coordinates are bounded by its
occurrence counts, and its height extrema multiply counts by such coordinates; this only multiplies
the bit bound by a constant.

Corollary 4.2 (Polynomial raw depth is harmless). Any valid raw epoch has at most r − 1 individual
contractions, and all integer data needed for its source-based primitive checks and monomial updates
have polynomial size in the initial encoded parameters. This remains true for r − 1 sequential
one-pair phases or arbitrarily deep valid forests.


4.1    Why primitivity, rather than arbitrary scaling, matters

The cofactor argument bounds the primitive kernel vector, not arbitrary multiples of it. If a
procedure were allowed to replace a live generator by an arbitrary power without maintaining
surjectivity, the same rational kernel line could be represented by arbitrarily large integer vectors.
The gcd condition is therefore not cosmetic. It is the exact property that prevents spurious scale
growth.
   Similarly, independent source rows are necessary. Merely accumulating many relations that
vanish after projection gives no determinant bound on the map unless they have the full required
rank. The nonzero current donor exponent vector supplies that rank increase at each contraction.


4.2    A family requiring linear growth of exponent bit length

Proposition 4.3 (Sharpness of the rB dependence). For q = 2b and r ≥ 2, the source presentation

                                    ⟨x1 , . . . , xr | xqi x−1
                                                            i+1 , 1 ≤ i < r⟩                                     (7)
                                                                               i−1
is infinite cyclic. A valid sequential raw epoch produces xi 7→ xq1                  , and the largest exponent has
exactly (r − 1)b + 1 bits.

Proof. Each source relation eliminates xi+1 as xqi by an ordinary Tietze move. Applying these
eliminations in increasing order gives the stated powers and leaves the free generator x1 . The bit
count follows from q r−1 = 2b(r−1) .

   Thus a logarithmic bound in r would be false in general. Nevertheless the bit growth is linear
in rB, not exponential in the number of contractions. These are abstract presentations of Z, not
claimed difficult knot diagrams. The distinction is especially important for the capacity experiments
below.


4.3    A stronger bound from a known nonzero character

Theorem 4.4 (Character-controlled columns). Let h ∈ Zr satisfy Ah = 0. On any block Iz for
which h is not identically zero, let gz = gcd{|hi | : i ∈ Iz }. Then hi ̸= 0 for every i ∈ Iz , and

                                                hi
                                      ki = εz      ,       εz ∈ {1, −1}.                                         (8)
                                                gz

In particular |ki | ≤ maxi∈Iz |hi | on such a block.



                                                       8
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                          ProveIt research note


Proof. Since AJ h = 0, Theorem 3.3 gives h = Kc with c ∈ Zs . On Iz , hi = cz ki . If the restriction is
nonzero, cz ̸= 0 and all ki ̸= 0, so all hi ̸= 0. Their gcd is |cz |, because the ki are primitive. Solving
for ki proves (8).

    For consistently oriented Wirtinger meridians the usual character sends every generator to one.
A raw epoch frozen at that presentation therefore has |ki | = 1 throughout. Large powers arise
only after a change of source coordinates, or on other supplied presentations. This gives both
a useful optimization target and a warning: algebraic huge-power fixtures are not automatically
representative of direct meridional inputs. Blocks on which a known character is identically zero
still require the general cofactor bound.


5    Reachable circuits versus historical allocation
The preceding result also sharpens the analysis of the existing updater; a new representation is not
necessary merely to obtain a polynomial raw-epoch bound. This observation prevents an incorrect
exponential-speedup narrative.
   Let Sj denote the number of nodes reachable from the current relator roots before batch j, and
let Nj be all arena nodes allocated so far. They need not be comparable by a fixed constant: old
versions can remain allocated without being current. Let Pj conservatively count all gates needed
for signed local power images in that batch, including reused gates participating in those image
circuits.

Lemma 5.1 (Reachable-node recurrence). For the raw mapper that substitutes terminal images
and maps each current reachable concatenation once,

                                              Sj+1 ≤ Sj + O(Pj ),                                       (9)
                                       Nj+1 − Nj ≤ Sj + O(Pj ).                                       (10)

Proof. Each old reachable concatenation has at most one mapped concatenation in the new current
graph. Its children are either other mapped nodes or nodes in the chosen terminal-image circuits.
Unchanged terminals can remain as before; changed terminals are accounted for among image gates.
The new current graph therefore contains at most one mapped representative for each old reachable
node, together with the image circuits. Old historical versions do not add a second copy to current
reachability. Structural interning and deletion of donor roots can only lower the count. The same
construction allocates at most that many new nodes, giving the second inequality.

   The pinned apply_projection implementation uses exactly this pattern: it constructs binary
powers and performs one snapshot traversal of arena._reachable(roots) [5]. The inspected word-
arena primitives use raw concatenation and binary powering; they do not call normalization in these
operations [6]. Negative images are constructed from oppositely signed letters. The forest variant
constructs shared parent powers with the same total local-power accounting [4].
   There are at most r − 1 contractions. Theorem 4.1 bounds every local power exponent by O(Λ)
bits, so binary powering gives           X
                                            Pj = O(rΛ).
                                            j<d

Combining this with Lemma 5.1 yields the following result.


                                                    9
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                         ProveIt research note


Theorem 5.2 (Polynomial cost for the existing raw updater). Throughout an epoch of d ≤ r − 1
successful raw batches,

                                     Sj = O(S0 + rΛ),                                               (11)
                                                                     
                                    Nd ≤ N0 + O dS0 + (d + 1)rΛ                                     (12)
                                                            2
                                        = N0 + O(rS0 + r Λ).                                        (13)

For the inspected raw primitives and polynomial arithmetic donor checks, planning, updating, and
replaying the entire epoch have polynomial total bit cost in the initial arena size, initial numeric
metadata, m, r, and label bit sizes. Normalization and legacy search are excluded.

Proof. Sum (9) to obtain (11), and then sum (10). Every scan and arithmetic primitive-width check
is polynomial in the current reachable or allocated data. There are at most r full candidate scans,
counting the final unsuccessful one, and at most r − 1 contractions. Exact additions, multiplications,
gcd computations, sorting of reachable identifiers, and cached metadata updates all have polynomial
cost on the bounded integers. If the epoch starts in an arena containing old unused nodes, their
existing size and maximum metadata bit length are part of the initial input cost; the theorem does
not erase that history.


5.1   The correction to the earlier accounting

The prior inequality Nj+1 ≤ 2Nj +O(rBj ) remains true. Its use as the only recurrence is unnecessarily
pessimistic because it treats every historically allocated node as though it were copied into every
current graph. The preceding two-counter analysis repairs this. Separately, the cofactor bound
replaces a pessimistic recurrence for Bj by a single uniform bound. Both improvements are required
to obtain the clean epoch statement.
   Accordingly, the old 2O(d) and 2O(d log r) raw bounds should be sharpened, not described as refuted
execution lower bounds. A general short-depth producer was never established; this note shows
that short raw depth is not the remaining issue under the epoch model. It does not show that a
useful raw epoch is easy to expose or that a search uses few source resets.


6     Source-anchored evaluation without historical substitution
The new representation stores the source circuit once and maintains only
                          r
                  π(i), ki i=1 ,   live labels,   deleted source slots,   move records.

A source terminal xϵi is interpreted as a homogeneous run of |ki | letters, with current label π(i) and
sign ϵ sgn(ki ). No power circuit is built for that run while the epoch remains raw.


6.1   Signed counts and eligibility

A bottom-up scan assigns a gate either a map from at most two current labels to positive and
negative occurrence counts, or a marker meaning that more than two labels occur. Concatenation
adds counts and unions supports. Since these are literal words, opposite occurrences are not
cancelled. A relator is a candidate precisely when its current support has two labels, each occurring
with a single sign.

                                                     10
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                             ProveIt research note


   The scan must be recomputed for a new image table. An old source gate that once used three
distinct live generators may use only two after contractions. Caching its “more than two” marker
independently of the image state would be unsound. The native updater avoids that issue by
assigning new node identities to changed words; a fixed-source implementation must instead use
state-sensitive summaries. The reference kernel deliberately recomputes them.
   Let a coherent candidate have signed counts U, V ̸= 0. Put

                   e = gcd(|U |, |V |),   u = U/e,        v = V /e,   p = |u|,   q = |v|.

Rename or invert its two generators so its word is positive. The primitive width test uses an
increment q on its first letter and −p on its second.


6.2   Prefix extrema on a fixed circuit

For a word segment W , store the triple (D, ℓ, h) of total height change, minimum prefix height, and
maximum prefix height, including the empty prefix. For two segments the exact composition law is

                  (D, ℓ, h) ⋆ (E, ℓ′ , h′ ) = D + E, min(ℓ, D + ℓ′ ), max(h, D + h′ ) .
                                                                                        
                                                                                                        (14)

A homogeneous source-leaf run with total increment d has profile (d, min(0, d), max(0, d)). Thus
internal points in a huge power require no iteration: a constant-slope segment attains its extrema at
its endpoints.

Proposition 6.1 (Coherent-width certificate). Let W be a coherent two-letter word with counts
ep, eq, where p, q > 0 and gcd(p, q) = 1. If the profile with increments q, −p has width p + q − 1,
then W is the eth power of a cyclically shifted primitive word. The condition can be checked exactly
by (14) on the source SLP.

   Appendix A gives a self-contained proof of the sufficient criterion. This is the criterion already
used by the maintained primitive module [7]; the present work changes its evaluation representation
and global complexity accounting, not its logical role. When one total occurrence count is one,
the word is automatically primitive: it is cyclically a power of one generator followed by a single
occurrence of the other. The producer uses this shortcut; the independent verifier does not.


6.3   Updates and a finite producer

For a disjoint batch, form the local table in (1). Compose it with the cumulative table once, across
all original generators. If the current image of xi is aki and the local map sends a to z f , its new
image is z ki f . Mark the selected source slots deleted and remove the eliminated live labels. All
donor checks precede any table mutation.
   The reference producer scans source slots in fixed order, greedily choosing disjoint eligible pairs.
An optional limit on pairs per batch supports controlled sequential schedules. On failure to find
a pair it stops with a nondecisive endpoint; it does not call normalization or arbitrary search. At
rank one it computes the signed exponent of every retained source root under the cumulative table.
It reports the infinite-cyclic quotient endpoint only when all these exponents are zero.

               Listing 1: Raw source-anchored producer; local operations are exact.
freeze source circuit, live labels, and original relator slots


                                                     11
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                     ProveIt research note


images[i] := (i, 1); deleted := empty set
while number of live labels > 1:
    summaries := signed counts on source under current images
    batch := greedy coherent primitive-width donors in undeleted slots
    if batch is empty: return STALLED with the recorded prefix
    validate all batch witnesses against the pre-batch source images
    images := compose all original images with the disjoint local table
    delete precisely the chosen source slots; update live labels
check every remaining relator exponent at the one-generator endpoint
return recorded prefix and exact endpoint classification


Theorem 6.2 (Polynomial source-anchored epoch). The reference producer completes one frozen-
source epoch in polynomial bit time, including candidate discovery, witness construction, and the
endpoint. Independent replay has a polynomial bound as well. The working word representation
needs no new SLP nodes inside the epoch.
   For example, with D = Λ + ⌈log2 (M + m + max X + 2)⌉, a deliberately loose schoolbook bound
for production and replay is
                                O r(m + 1)(M + r + m)D3 .
                                                          
                                                                                           (15)
Up to certificate storage, working data use O((M + r + m)D) bits, with temporary candidate profiles
discarded between scans.

Proof. There are at most r − 1 contractions and r candidate scans, including a possible final failed
scan. A shared signed-count scan takes O(M ) arithmetic operations. Checking all m candidates
separately by a full source profile scan takes O(mM ) operations; sharing these candidate-specific
scans is not assumed. Updating the cumulative table takes O(r) products per batch, and the
terminal exponent pass takes O(M + m) additions and tests. All integers involved have O(D) bits
by Theorem 4.1 and the source-length discussion. Quadratic multiplication and conservative cubic
gcd accounting imply (15), with ample slack for loop and identifier costs. Replay checks at most
r − 1 witnesses and has no more expensive task.
   The count or profile assigned to each source node has constant arity, and only one candidate
profile need be retained at a time. Images and slot metadata are linear in r + m. A certificate
contains at most r − 1 witnesses, so its scalar and label payload is also polynomial. Structural
dictionaries can be replaced by ordered maps if a deterministic comparison-model bound is preferred;
the Python implementation uses ordinary dictionaries.

   The bound is not advertised as an optimized exponent of input size. It establishes that raw
phase count is no longer an exponential parameter. Practical dispatch, caching, and multi-candidate
evaluation can be investigated without changing the proof obligation. External cancellation callbacks
are assumed constant-time in these bounds; their actual costs must otherwise be added. The default
standalone run has no such callback.


6.4   Materialize only at a real representation boundary

A fresh ordinary binary SLP for the current presentation can be built by constructing signed powers
for the r cumulative images, then mapping each source concatenation once. This uses

                                              O(M + rΛ)


                                                 12
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                       ProveIt research note


gates and polynomial bit work. An export may be necessary before calling an existing normalizer or
another backend. It is unnecessary for the source-based primitive checks, and performing it after
every raw batch defeats the main representation saving. The benchmark includes this eager policy
as an explicit negative control.
   Appending exports into an old arena rather than creating a fresh one retains history and must
be charged accordingly. The supplied adapter does not free or rewrite the caller’s arena, certify an
arbitrary image table, or silently change the existing source-provenance contract.


7     Independent replay and the nonabelian safety boundary
The package contains a producer and a separate verifier. They share the immutable source grammar
definition, but the verifier imports neither the producer’s planner, state class, width routine, nor
update helper. For each witness it traverses only nodes reachable from that source donor and
computes signed counts and prefix extrema together. The producer instead performs full source
scans and uses a unit-occurrence shortcut. This separates important algorithmic failure modes; it is
not a claim of formal verification in a proof assistant.


7.1   Certificate contract

The top-level certificate contains exactly a format identifier, a source SHA-256 identifier, a list of
disjoint batches, and an endpoint classification. Each witness records its original slot, ordered pair
of live labels, primitive signed vector, positive power exponent, and width. Scalar arithmetic fields
use canonical hexadecimal strings, avoiding decimal conversion limits on very large exact integers.
Identifiers must be strict integers, not Booleans.
   Before converting a supplied hexadecimal scalar to an integer, the checker bounds its string length
using a conservative version of Theorem 4.1. It then requires canonical spelling and checks its bit
length. The checker rejects reused or invalid slots, nonlive labels, nonprimitive vectors, noncoherent
words, foreign letters, incorrect widths, extra fields, and overlapping pairs. All witnesses in a batch
are verified against the intact pre-batch state, before any update is applied.
   The source hash is a bookkeeping binding, not a probabilistic word-equality oracle. The checker
receives the caller’s actual source and recomputes every mathematical assertion from its content; no
positive algebraic conclusion is obtained by comparing two hashes alone. Source serialization and
incoming payload sizes still need an outer input-byte allowance in a production host. The kernel’s
cooperative work allowance is not a hard process-memory limit.
   At rank one, the verifier independently recomputes every retained source relator’s exponent. A
deleted slot is exempt only because its own donor witness was verified. A nonempty raw circuit
with exponent zero is accepted at this endpoint, since a word in one generator is determined by its
exponent. No reduction or expansion is required. A stalled record is merely a verified prefix with
no cyclic endpoint; replay does not certify that every possible donor has been searched.


7.2   Why the lattice audit cannot authorize a quotient

Example 7.1 (A false positive for abelianization-only reasoning). Consider

                                          H = ⟨a, b | a2 b3 ⟩.


                                                  13
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                        ProveIt research note


Its source row is (2, 3), with primitive integer kernel vector (3, −2). The row rank, annihilation,
primitive gcd, and cofactor identities all hold. Nevertheless H is not infinite cyclic: sending a to
a transposition and b to a three-cycle gives a surjection onto the nonabelian group S3 . The word
a2 b3 is therefore not primitive. Its profile with increments 3, −2 has width 6, not the required
2 + 3 − 1 = 4, and the implemented primitive checker rejects it.

   This example rules out a tempting but invalid shortcut: selecting rows of A with a convenient
integer kernel and treating their quotient as a free group. The matrix argument controls the size of
already valid nonabelian operations. It does not discover valid operations from homology alone.


7.3   Proper powers and topological provenance

For a proper-power donor we with e > 1, replay proves the local primitive structure and records
a torsion-freeness obligation. Without that obligation, it certifies the quotient obtained by ad-
ditionally killing w, not an isomorphism with the supplied arbitrary presentation. The returned
needs_torsion_freeness field cannot be ignored.
   A full recognizer must independently reconstruct the group presentation from the validated
classical knot source, replay every preceding presentation move, authorize proper-power elimination
from the resulting invariant, and retain its established terminal interpretation. The new research
format has no planar-diagram field or complete presentation-prefix language. It is therefore not a
standalone knot certificate. In particular, presenting an abstract algebraic fixture to this module is
not a test of unknot recognition on a diagram.


8     Reproducible validation
All measurements below come from completed runs retained in the bundle. They were performed on
CPython 3.13.5 under Linux x86-64. The package is standard-library Python and does not require
Regina, a native compiler, a computer-algebra system, or a numerical tolerance. Exact run-length
word comparisons, rational elimination, and integer determinants are used where specified.


8.1   Unit and adversarial tests

The final suite has 38 passing tests; the retained final run took 0.651 seconds. The tests include
exact small-word width checks, signed trees, nonunit primitive vectors, proper-power obligations,
arbitrary label sets, all-relator endpoints, source rebinding, malformed scalar encodings, incorrect
widths, invalid slots, duplicate or overlapping pairs, Booleans in integer fields, cancellation, work and
expansion limits, and protocol-level export. A producer-monkeypatch test makes producer helpers
raise exceptions while independent replay still succeeds. Additional tests check the reachable-node
recurrence, the character bound, unit images on a meridional character, and unused long source
gates.
   The preceding upstream synthesis README reports its own maintained-suite checkpoints [2].
Those are not rerun results of this delivery. We did not obtain a complete native checkout in the
execution environment, and the complete Python recognizer, its knot corpus, and the Rust port
were not executed here.




                                                   14
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                        ProveIt research note


8.2   Exact audit counts

The completed audit uses seed 2026100801 and took 13.353 seconds. It contains:

               Checked object                                          Completed count
               Random signed-tree presentations                                      600
               Prefix checks against independent cofactor kernels                  3,393
               Prefix comparisons with source-derived updater                      3,393
               Exact raw-root run-length word comparisons                         26,037
               Positive binary words of lengths 2 through 12                       8,166
               Signed profile cases                                               32,664
               Independent complete prefix replays                                 2,728
               Additional nonunit primitive fixtures                                 324

    Random trees vary signs, branching, redundant slots, and batch sizes. Their prefixes are checked
using a separate linear audit: rational row rank, AJ K = 0, primitive block gcds, and exact maximal
minors calculated using fraction-free determinants. The word-comparison oracle compares the full
raw words through exact run-length lists, rather than merely comparing their free reductions or
hashes. The finite audit does not prove the general size theorem; it tests the implementation against
its consequences.
    The binary-word audit uses an independent expected set consisting of rotations of a mechan-
ical Christoffel period, repeated according to the gcd of the letter counts. Four sign choices
are tested for every positive word. The additional nonunit fixtures use coprime count pairs
(2, 3), (3, 5), (5, 8), (8, 13), and (13, 21), their rotations and signs, with further eliminations and
retained raw zero-exponent words.


8.3   Large powers without literal expansion

The capacity cases instantiate (7) with q = 2b .

                 r      b   Exponent bits     Source nodes   Chained nodes   Proof bytes
               12      64             705              743           2110          3,307
               20      64           1,217            1,279           3686          8,035
               24     128           2,945            3,019           8826         19,999
               64    1024          64,513           64,707             —       1,038,327

Table 1: Completed capacity checks. The final row uses the anchored producer and independent
source replay only; the dash is not a measured chained result. Proof bytes are the retained JSON
serialization counts.

   The largest case verifies a cumulative exponent of 64,513 bits, corresponding to an expanded
power far beyond literal storage. Its 63 sequential contractions are permitted by the theorem; no
shallow schedule is used. The certificate itself is about one megabyte, emphasizing that compressed
computation is not synonymous with negligible proof size.

Retained unsuccessful experiment. An earlier audit attempted larger chained-update compar-
isons at (r, b) = (16, 256), (32, 512), (64, 1024) and exceeded a 200-second process cap before writing

                                                    15
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                         ProveIt research note


a completed report. That attempt supplies neither a pass nor a valid timing comparison. Its scope
is recorded in data/exploratory-timeout.txt. The completed audit uses smaller paired capacity
cases and runs only the anchored producer plus independent replay for the largest case. The table
does not silently extrapolate the missing comparison.


9    Paired maintenance measurements and a negative result
The benchmark isolates a sharply defined workload: maintenance of a supplied, preverified raw
schedule. Each timed call includes initialization, every scheduled update, and the exact one-generator
endpoint. Schedule discovery and independent replay occur outside the timers. The reference updater
is the inspected native apply_projection function copied verbatim into a module and executed on
the supplied compatible research Arena; this is not the entire native word arena or recognizer.
   The experiment uses seven algebraic families, five measured rounds, one warm-up per arm, and
randomized arm order within a round. There are five arms: lazy source-anchored maintenance, an
identical lazy A/A control, chained raw substitution, its identical A/A control, and source-anchored
maintenance that exports a full circuit after every batch. Thus 175 measured calls and 35 warm-ups
complete. The seed is 2026100802; total driver time is 7.405 seconds. The schedules use one pair
per batch, with power parameter b = 16.

                Family     r   Lazy (ms)      Chained (ms)   Eager (ms)   C/L       E/L
                star      32       0.350             1.575        1.960    4.49     6.20
                star      64       1.077             4.839        6.456    4.28     5.87
                star     128       4.236            21.917       23.490    4.12     5.54
                star     256      14.925            51.865       92.259    3.44     6.19
                chain     16       0.200             4.114        9.666   22.41    48.42
                chain     32       0.390            16.713       63.708   45.70   153.11
                chain     64       1.443            79.373      497.437   53.23   348.82

Table 2: Supplied-schedule maintenance only. Times are marginal medians; C/L and E/L are
medians of within-round chained/lazy and eager/lazy ratios. They need not equal ratios of marginal
medians. No entry is an end-to-end recognition speedup.

   On these fixtures, the paired chained/lazy ratios are 3.44–4.49 for stars and 22.41–53.23 for chains.
Such ratios show that maintaining a monomial table can avoid real raw-circuit work. They do not
establish the same improvement when donor discovery, independent proof replay, earlier filters,
diagram simplification, or normalization dominate a complete call. The difference between the
standalone arena and the full production arena is an additional limitation of the timing comparison.
   The A/A ratios range approximately from 0.76 to 1.11. This is material noise, especially for small
calls. Exact work counts and output equality support the mechanism, but the quoted wall-clock
factors should not be treated as precise hardware-independent constants. The raw JSON retains
the randomized order, all samples, controls, structural counters, and source hashes.

Eager export is consistently harmful here. The source-anchored arm that materializes a
new circuit after every batch is slower than chained maintenance in every measured case. Its
paired eager/lazy ratios range from 5.54 to 348.82. On the 64-generator chain, marginal median
maintenance times are 1.443 ms for lazy source evaluation, 79.373 ms for chaining, and 497.437 ms


                                                    16
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                       ProveIt research note



                      Family      r   Lazy A/A    Chained A/A     Chained nodes
                      star       32       0.772           0.763              99
                      star       64       1.013           0.851             163
                      star      128       0.820           1.107             291
                      star      256       0.978           0.981             547
                      chain      16       1.007           0.928             786
                      chain      32       0.934           1.007            1634
                      chain      64       1.041           0.949            3330

Table 3: A/A controls and allocated chained nodes. Submillisecond controls show appreciable timing
noise; all retained samples are reported, not replaced by selected reruns.


for eager export. The optimization must therefore preserve the lazy representation across the epoch.
Merely rebuilding from the source after every substitution is not the proposed improvement.


10     Integration plan for the maintained repository
The implementation is packaged for review without mutating the user’s repository. A suggested
destination is a new research directory under Topology/UnknotRecognition/fast/, followed by a
separately reviewed integration into the primitive-projection route. Existing defaults should not
change on the basis of the algebraic timings above.


10.1    The minimal host interface

At a host-selected raw boundary, snapshot the reachable source circuit, its fixed relator slots, and
live labels. Retain the source’s complete verified presentation prefix in the existing host certificate;
the research snapshot alone does not replace it. Run source-based checks and table updates while all
permitted moves remain monomial and source-slot preserving. Independently replay the arithmetic
prefix before accepting any algebraic endpoint. Export once when a normalizer or another circuit
consumer genuinely needs a standard SLP, then freeze a new source after the host’s verified transition.
   The included native_adapter.py supplies snapshot and export functions using the inspected
arena protocol. It does not expose a new native CLI flag, modify existing version-six or version-seven
certificates, or prove a cross-version compatibility claim. An implementation can initially run it in
shadow mode: compare current raw words and verdict-neutral metadata while leaving the old path
authoritative.


10.2    Source pin and review checks

The copied updater is pinned to commit

                              7518823550fbc8c217bc8be0113fe52002e77465

with whole-file Git blob

                              0aff98067b485d285a9c8026fcac56ae9934edc0.




                                                  17
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                      ProveIt research note


The helper integration/check_native_source.py compares that whole-file Git hash and the
updater’s abstract syntax tree with a local checkout. It is supplied but was not run against a full
checkout in this delivery. The full native word arena’s inspected blob is recorded separately in the
provenance file. Evolving repository heads must not be assumed byte-identical to this pin.
    Before production adoption, a native integration should pass the entire maintained suite, source-
reconstructing certificate replay, adversarial resource tests, and paired whole-call measurements
on actual knot diagrams. It should cover raw-to-normalized and normalized-to-raw transitions,
unchanged legacy certificate formats, proper-power authorization, cancellation during export, and
all-relator terminal checks. A memory audit must account for the host’s old arena, the frozen source,
live tables, proof buffers, and temporary scans simultaneously.


10.3    Suggested changes to the maintained exposition

The earlier raw-phase bounds can be retained as elementary coarse bounds and followed by Theo-
rems 4.1 and 5.2. The text should then replace “a short raw schedule is needed to control repeated
exponent growth” by “raw epochs have polynomial encoded cost; discovery, representation resets,
and decisive completion require separate control.” The forest discussion can invoke Lemma 2.3
rather than compounding an r factor per forest phase indefinitely.
   This is a refinement to the analysis, not evidence that the old code was incorrect. Nor does
a polynomial raw epoch justify enabling primitive projection or forests by default: the existing
measurements report ordinary corpus overhead in some configurations [3, 4]. The new experiment
does not supersede those whole-call results.


11     A more precise route to quasi-polynomial recognition
Write QP for time exp((log(n + 2))O(1) ) on explicit input size n. The new local theorem supports a
cleaner conditional composition statement.

Theorem 11.1 (Epoch-search composition). Suppose a source-correct recognition procedure on
an n-bit knot input explores at most exp(O(logα (n + 2))) states, for a fixed α ≥ 1. Assume each
state has a frozen-source presentation, initial numeric metadata, and live-label encoding of size at
most exp(O(logβ (n + 2))), for a fixed β ≥ 1. Suppose every nonraw transition, including source
reconstruction, exposure, normalization, and bookkeeping, costs at most exp(O(logγ (n + 2))), for a
fixed γ ≥ 1.
   If the search is sound and complete with correctly verified terminal tests, then replacing each raw
epoch by either the analyzed maintained mechanism or the source-anchored algorithm gives total
time                                                          
                                  exp O logmax{α,β,γ} (n + 2) .
No separate logarithmic raw-phase-depth hypothesis is required.

Proof. Each raw epoch costs a fixed polynomial in its initial encoded parameters by Theorem 5.2
or 6.2. A polynomial of exp(O(logβ (n + 2))) has the same asymptotic form. Multiply the maximum
per-state processing and transition cost by the state bound. Adding the corresponding logarithmic
exponents yields the claimed maximum-degree bound. Soundness and completeness are supplied by
the hypothesized search, not by this running-time multiplication.


                                                 18
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                      ProveIt research note


    The theorem isolates, rather than proves, the global obligations. In particular, it does not
bound the number of states at which no coherent donor is exposed, the size of a new source after
a nonmonomial move, or the cost of choosing successful moves. A raw producer can stall on a
complicated presentation of Z without contradicting any local result. An exact exponential fallback
still preserves completeness, but invoking it does not establish a quasi-polynomial worst-case bound.
   A useful conceptual shift is to distinguish three quantities: current algebraic rank, encoded
presentation size at epoch boundaries, and the size of the explored transition graph. Rank reduction
controls the first inside a raw epoch. The cofactor argument controls intermediate monomial
coefficients. Neither alone controls the other two quantities across arbitrary search.


12     Further research questions and concrete targets
The following problems prioritize missing global mechanisms and testable native improvements.
None is presented as already resolved by the experiments.

Q1. Bounded-cost exposure from knot provenance. For source presentations actually
    reached from validated knot diagrams, can one expose a useful coherent primitive donor with a
    bounded family of nonmonomial moves? A meaningful theorem must bound both the number
    of tried moves and the encoded size of every resulting source, rather than merely showing
    that some sequence exists.
Q2. An amortized potential across source resets. Find a potential combining source grammar
    size, character height, selected-row rank, and presentation complexity that cannot increase
    too often under the host’s normalization/exposure policy. The target is a bound on total reset
    cost, not another bound on contractions within a fixed epoch.
Q3. Native source-anchored replay and complete-call measurement. Implement a shadow
    backend preserving the existing source prefix and old certificate versions. Require exact equality
    of the full raw relator slots and paired timings including producer discovery, independent
    replay, export, and earlier pipeline stages on actual diagrams. Report regressions as well as
    speedups; do not use the supplied-schedule ratios as substitutes.
Q4. Character-aware dispatch. Use Theorem 4.4 to distinguish unit-image meridional epochs,
    nonzero-character blocks with small exponents, and zero-character blocks. Can a validated
    character predict whether source anchoring will save work before performing an expensive
    scan? The native cost model must include the cost of updating that character through the
    verified prefix.
Q5. State-sensitive summaries with sublinear updates. The reference implementation
    rescans the source when live labels merge. Can capped supports and occurrence counts
    be maintained incrementally with a provable amortized bound while allowing previously
    large supports to become small? Caching an old ineligibility marker is not a valid answer.
    Union-by-size or dependency indexing should be evaluated against full-scan costs and memory.
Q6. Shared evaluation of many primitive widths. Candidate profiles have different weights
    (q, −p). Develop an exact multi-query representation for prefix extrema that avoids one full
    scan per candidate without producing an exponentially large parametric envelope. A negative
    envelope-size example would also clarify the right restricted source classes.



                                                 19
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                     ProveIt research note


 Q7. Direct source-anchored forest certificates. The theorem covers forests through lineariza-
     tion, but the research format contains only disjoint pair batches. Add direct forest replay
     with independently checked acyclicity, unit coordinates, and parent-first table composition.
     Compare certificate length and replay work against sequential linearization, including tall
     chains and shared-anchor stars.
 Q8. Sharper determinant bounds from knot-derived matrices. The bound uses only entry
     size. Can sparsity, total unimodularity of particular prefix matrices, or controlled minors from
     the verified topological source replace Lr−1 rO(r) by a smaller parameter? The meridional
     character already forces unit images before coordinate changes; the interesting question is
     what survives the actual exposure operations.
 Q9. Controlled extensions beyond monomial images. Can a bounded-support generalization
     allow an original generator to map to a product of a few live powers while retaining a useful
     primitive lattice normalization and a polynomial representation invariant? A rational kernel
     bound alone will not control noncommutative word structure. Any extension needs new
     nonabelian arguments and explicit circuit-size bounds.
Q10. A complete terminal class with a bounded transition graph. Identify a diagram-derived
     class for which the exact native procedure reaches a verified terminal after quasi-polynomially
     many controlled exposure states. The class should be specified by checkable input properties,
     not by the existence of an unknown successful certificate of the desired size.
Q11. Formalize the saturation and reachability lemmas. The proof-assistant target can be
     small and precise: disjoint primitive columns, row-rank growth, the integer kernel identity,
     maximal-minor bounds, and the raw mapper’s reachable-node injection. Formalization should
     expose which claims need source provenance and which are pure integer linear algebra.
Q12. Geometric interfaces to hierarchy compression. Determine whether the polynomial
     raw-epoch component can serve as an exact local operation in a quantified handle- or hierarchy-
     based recognizer. A successful connection must construct the algebraic source from the
     geometric state and control the transition graph and attachment data; analogy alone is not
     an end-to-end complexity proof.


13     Conclusion
The source exponent-sum matrix constrains a whole sequence of primitive projections much more
strongly than a recurrence on the latest word length. Selected source rows have exactly the rank
lost by the quotient, and the cumulative monomial columns form their saturated integer kernel.
This yields a phase-independent cofactor bound and, together with reachable-node accounting, a
polynomial bound for complete raw epochs, even for the existing updater. The new source-anchored
implementation further reduces unnecessary representation maintenance while preserving exact
independent arithmetic replay.
   The result changes the location of the remaining complexity problem. A shallow raw schedule
is no longer needed to prevent exponential encoded growth inside a fixed epoch. The unresolved
general work is to control exposure, new source sizes, reset costs, and the number of search states
needed to reach a decisive terminal. The supplied proofs, counterexamples, tests, and retained
negative measurements make that boundary explicit and provide a reviewable next step for the
maintained recognizer.

                                                 20
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                            ProveIt research note


A     Proof of the coherent-width certificate
We prove Proposition 6.1 without invoking word expansion in the algorithm. Expansion is used
only as a mathematical object in this proof. Invert the two generators independently so that the
word is positive in letters a, b. Let its counts be ep, eq with gcd(p, q) = 1, and set N = p + q. The
height increments are q on a and −p on b.


A.1    The minimum strip forces a repeated period

Both increments are congruent to q modulo N . Thus after j letters the height is congruent to the
initial height plus jq modulo N . Since gcd(q, N ) = 1, the first N heights have distinct residues. A
strip of width N − 1 contains exactly N integer heights, so it contains exactly one representative of
each residue.
   Translate the strip to {0, 1, . . . , N − 1}. From height h, an a step stays in the strip exactly when
h ≤ p − 1; a b step stays in the strip exactly when h ≥ p. These alternatives partition the strip.
Hence the next letter is uniquely determined by the current height. After N steps the residue
returns to its start, so the actual height and then the letter sequence repeat. The word is a literal
eth power of a period of length N . That period has zero net height, hence exactly p letters a and q
letters b.


A.2    The forced period is primitive

Use induction on p + q. The base p = q = 1 gives a cyclic shift of ab, which is primitive. If p > q,
every b is followed by an a: after a b the height lies in {0, . . . , q − 1}, below p. Cyclically, every b is
therefore preceded by an a as well, because two b’s cannot be adjacent. Group each such preceding
a with its b, replacing ab by one new symbol c.
    The vertices removed by this replacement are precisely those immediately after these a steps, at
heights p, . . . , p + q − 1. Every strip height is visited once in the period, so the remaining heights
are exactly 0, . . . , p − 1. An unpaired a step still has increment q, while a new c step has increment
q − p = −(p − q). The new cyclic word has counts p − q, q, coprime and positive, and width
p − 1 = (p − q) + q − 1. It is primitive in the free group on a, c by induction. The assignment a 7→ a,
c 7→ ab sends a free basis to a free basis of F (a, b), so its original period is primitive as well.
   If q > p, interchange the letters and reverse the sign of height, reducing to the preceding case.
Cyclic rotations and independent generator inversions preserve primitivity. This proves the certificate
in its signed form.


A.3    Why circuit extrema suffice

A repeated homogeneous run has monotone height; only its endpoints can be extrema. For a
concatenation, all prefixes lie either in the left part or in the translated right part, giving (14).
Induction over the source DAG computes exactly the same extrema as the conceptual expanded
word. No approximation, probabilistic fingerprint, or truncation enters the certificate.




                                                     21
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                           ProveIt research note


B     A worked three-generator epoch
Consider
                            G = ⟨x1 , x2 , x3 | x21 x−1   3 −1       −1    −1
                                                     2 , x2 x3 , x3 x3 x1 x1 ⟩.
The source matrix is                                         
                                               2 −1 0
                                          A = 0 3 −1 .
                                                     
                                               0 0  0
The first contraction sends x2 to x21 ; the current second source slot is literally x61 x−1
                                                                                         3 . Its contraction
              6
sends x3 to x1 . The final cumulative column is K = (1, 2, 6) . T

   The two selected rows have alternating maximal minors (1, 2, 6), so their primitive kernel vector
is exactly the cumulative image. The third source slot is never deleted by a redundancy guess.
Its final raw word is x61 x−6    −1
                           1 x1 x1 , whose exponent is checked to be zero at rank one. This small
example displays the three separate mechanisms: nonabelian donor verification, global integer size
control, and all-relator terminal checking.


C     Package map and reproduction commands
The bundle contains the standalone article, all Python source, unit tests, exact audit and timing
drivers, retained raw JSON and text logs, source provenance, an integration note, and a hash
manifest. No external font files, third-party preprint PDFs, or complete copied repository are
redistributed. The only reproduced native implementation fragment is the attributed MIT-0 raw
updater in reference_update.py.
                        Listing 2: Commands from the unpacked bundle root.
# Exact unit and adversarial tests (standard library only).
PYTHONPATH=src python -B -m unittest discover -s tests -v

# Recompute exact audits or paired maintenance results to NEW files.
python -B experiments/audit.py --output data/audit-rerun.json
python -B experiments/benchmark.py --output data/benchmark-rerun.json --rounds 5

# Generate a small algebraic source and its independently replayed proof.
python -B experiments/demo.py

# Regenerate article tables from the retained completed measurements.
python -B experiments/make_tables.py

# Rebuild the article; no BibTeX database is required.
pdflatex -interaction=nonstopmode -halt-on-error article.tex
pdflatex -interaction=nonstopmode -halt-on-error article.tex

# After obtaining the pinned ProveIt checkout, check the copied updater.
python -B integration/check_native_source.py --checkout /path/to/ProveIt

   The last command is a future integration check, not a completed result reported here. The demo
proves an algebraic endpoint for a supplied presentation; it does not construct or recognize a knot
diagram. Reruns should write new result files so that measured historical samples are not silently
replaced.

                                                    22
Polynomial raw epochs in unknot recognition                                           ProveIt research note


References
 [1] V. Reshetnikov and contributors, ProveIt: Topology/UnknotRecognition, repository README,
     inspected 8 October 2026. Git blob 7d80dc0740b232d01c113e26c156e6ac2370d92b.
     https://github.com/VladimirReshetnikov/ProveIt/tree/main/Topology/UnknotRecognition.

 [2] ProveIt contributors, UnknotRecognition synthesis README, inspected 8 October 2026, including the
     primitive-planner integration checkpoint. Git blob 86884529940b9962345028fbf00349be8890d23d.
     https://github.com/VladimirReshetnikov/ProveIt/blob/main/Topology/UnknotRecognition/
     synthesis/README.md.

 [3] ProveIt contributors, Independently replayed disjoint primitive-pair projections, maintained synthesis
     section, inspected 8 October 2026. Git blob 3e03140c627ccb12d9df2e7615a49df351eabc16.
     https://github.com/VladimirReshetnikov/ProveIt/blob/main/Topology/UnknotRecognition/
     synthesis/primitive_projection.tex.

 [4] ProveIt contributors, Contracting unit-coordinate primitive forests in one raw batch, maintained
     synthesis section, inspected 8 October 2026. Git blob 86518c69bf58c69e502e75075453fa1451f2716c.
     https://github.com/VladimirReshetnikov/ProveIt/blob/main/Topology/UnknotRecognition/
     synthesis/primitive_forest.tex.

 [5] ProveIt contributors, fast/fastunknot/primitive_projection.py, commit
     7518823550fbc8c217bc8be0113fe52002e77465, whole-file Git blob
     0aff98067b485d285a9c8026fcac56ae9934edc0, MIT-0. The complete module was inspected; its raw
     updater is reproduced in the bundle.

 [6] ProveIt contributors, fast/fastunknot/compressed_words.py, same pinned commit as [5], Git blob
     bd68418e226813a7fa50dc87405c214970ddf50e. The initial 200 source lines, including raw
     concatenation, binary powering, and reachable-node traversal, were inspected.

 [7] ProveIt contributors, fast/fastunknot/primitive_power.py, same pinned commit as [5], Git blob
     dcad51e89a2bdd01c1d87a40ae66bf016d2df7ea. Exact coherent primitive-power width queries on
     maintained word circuits.

 [8] Oxford Mathematical Institute, Marc Lackenby announces a new unknot recognition algorithm that runs
     in quasi-polynomial time, 2 February 2021. Announcement following the UC Davis seminar:
     https://www.maths.ox.ac.uk/node/38304.

 [9] M. Lackenby, Incompressible surfaces, hierarchies and unknot recognition, arXiv:2607.23350v1, July
     2026, especially Sections 9–10. https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.23350. Section 9 was also inspected in
     the PDF on printed page 34.

[10] R. P. Osborne and H. Zieschang, Primitives in the free group on two generators, Inventiones
     Mathematicae 63 (1981), 17–24. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01389191.

[11] M. Lohrey and A. Weiß, The Power Word Problem, in MFCS 2019, Leibniz International Proceedings in
     Informatics 138 (2019), 43:1–43:15. https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.MFCS.2019.43.




                                                    23
