Gowers Szemeredi formalization checkpoint — 2026-10-06

Scope
  The goal remains open. No improvement to the final Szemeredi bound is claimed.
  The source catalogue contains all 120 unique numbered theorem, lemma,
  proposition, and corollary headings in sz-thm-gowers-proof.tex.
  There are 100 checked exact companion proofs and 20 open statements.
  The JSON ledger records every statement, its TeX heading lines, its Lean
  definition, and related results. Conditional implications, restricted cases,
  and counterexamples are not counted as proofs of the full statement.
  Matching headings does not establish mathematical fidelity: several source
  statements and shared definitions have documented repairs or unresolved gaps.

Verification at this checkpoint
  All 206 modules reachable from GowersSzemeredi.Audit compiled successfully.
  The axiom audit checked 1,879 public Gowers theorems and found only propext,
  Classical.choice, and Quot.sound. The audit independently counted 100 exact
  companion proofs and 20 open catalogue statements from Lean's theorem types.
  Existing dependency modules emit linter/deprecation warnings; no proof
  errors remain in this build. The JSON ledger reproduces exactly and has no
  unmatched numbered TeX headings or unmatched catalogue entries.

Completed polynomial degree induction
  ProgressionChunks shares the rounding arithmetic from Section 16.
  Proofs05TargetPartition constructs target-length refinements on natural
  progressions, preserving containment and therefore all diameter bounds.
  Proofs05LinearPartition proves the strong degree-one Corollary 5.6 input.
  It gives diameter at most N*r^(-1/8) for targets v <= r^(1/16), already
  when r >= 65536. This is an auxiliary bound, not a new Szemeredi estimate.
  Proofs05ResiduePartition prescribes a common step while preserving target
  lengths. Proofs05DegreeDrop subtracts the leading term after affine
  substitution over ZMod, including composite moduli and nonunit steps.
  Proofs05PolynomialDiameter bounds that term and adds diameter errors.
  Proofs05DegreeStep assembles the degree induction. Proofs05DegreeScale and
  Proofs05DegreeBudgets prove the real rounding and integer tower estimates.
  Proofs05FullPartition closes Corollaries 5.6 and 5.7 and Lemmas 5.9 and 5.14.
  The explicitly scale-qualified Corollary 5.8 is also proved; the original
  catalogue statement remains open. The degree induction also proves the
  stronger diameter N*r^(-2/K), with the documented recurrence-supported
  threshold and rounding-safe simultaneous threshold.

Completed multilinear height induction
  Proofs05Multiaffine expands affine substitutions on downward-closed
  families of square-free monomials. A maximal monomial keeps its leading
  coefficient; erasing it preserves closure and reduces the family size.
  The Boolean coefficient catalogue is equivalent to this subset-based form.
  Proofs05BoxPartition combines prescribed-step residue partitions along
  every axis, retaining properness and target or target-minus-one lengths.
  Proofs05BoxTransport transports refinements from modular index models.
  It proves restricted injectivity, properness, exact coverage, unchanged
  widths, and flattening of dependent local partitions, also for composite
  moduli. Proofs05MultilinearStep combines the two diameter errors.
  Proofs05MultilinearScale and Proofs05MultilinearBudgets verify upward
  rounding, the height thresholds, and the degree-uniform recurrence rate.
  Proofs05LinearRecurrence handles degree one separately by Dirichlet
  approximation; the Weyl auxiliary only applies in degrees at least two.
  Proofs05MultilinearInduction closes the complete height induction.
  Proofs05MultilinearPartition and Proofs05MultilinearIteration prove
  Lemma 5.10 and Corollary 5.11. Their catalogue signatures now explicitly
  require and preserve proper axes, making formal widths equal to the
  minimum axis cardinality in the paper. The exponent K^(-(2^k*q)) and
  threshold (2*T_k)^(K^(2^k*q)) are retained.

Completed Lemma 16.1
  Proofs16Slicing bounds centered differences by modular interval diameter,
  constructs common-step product boxes and tail projections, and proves
  exact partition coverage after retaining the cells meeting a fixed slice.
  It preserves properness and the lower width bounds. Its adjacency lemma
  handles both orientations, avoiding the paper's unproved assumption that
  y+d remains in the cell containing the selected slice y.
  Proofs16MultilinearLift proves that multiplying by a new coordinate
  preserves multilinearity and that the simultaneous threshold forces each
  partition cell to have width at least two.
  Proofs16Lemma1 applies Corollary 5.11 in dimension k+1 and then slices.
  The exact catalogue companion requires and preserves proper axes, as in
  the corrected multilinear partition statements. The original displayed
  exponent and the explicit rounding-safe threshold are unchanged.

Completed Lemma 16.5
  Proofs16ArrangementSelection disintegrates arrangement counts over their
  sidelengths and proves a weighted selection estimate. It selects a set H
  carrying at least (theta_1/4)*N^(17*k+15) arrangements, with each selected
  side having at least (theta_1/4)*N^(16*k+15) arrangements and the exact
  2^-43 approximate-homomorphism error needed by Theorem 10.13.
  Proofs16CubeDensity identifies fixed-side cube fibres with their base
  points, proves that the higher cube correlation equals the domain fibre
  count function, and matches the Section 10 and Section 16 large spectra.
  It also bounds the total fixed-side cube count by N^(k+1).
  Proofs16DomainBounds bounds additive sixteen-tuples by the fibre cap
  times the fifteenth power of the domain size, then derives a bound linear
  in that size. This proves the required cube-density lower bound. Exact
  density normalization uses the original fibre cap for sparse domains and
  a sixfold cap for dense ones, respecting Theorem 10.13's upper bound 1/6.
  Proofs16RadiusBounds and Proofs16RadiusComparison include the ceiling in
  the spectrum parameter and prove the explicit Section 16 radius fits
  inside the Section 10 extraction radius at every admissible density.
  Proofs16Lemma5 combines these results with Theorem 10.13, restricts the
  Bohr model to the requested spectrum and radius, and proves the exact
  catalogue companion without additional assumptions or statement changes.

Constructive proof of the migrated Lemma 16.6
  Proofs16InducedSelection constructs the induced value on occupied cube
  fibres, proves that it is independent of the representative, and uses
  Corollary 10.14 to prove linearity on every short Bohr progression. The
  packaged result derives Section16InducedSelection from Lemma 16.5 in
  prime moduli, rather than treating this selection as a standing input.
  Proofs16ProductRecurrence applies the simultaneous partition theorem
  directly to an aligned lifted whole product. The resulting last axis
  has the controlled common difference. The exponent and threshold match
  Lemma 16.1. The initial MultiplyLinear partition can change the base step,
  however, so its child times the original final axis need not be a box.
  That preceding alignment problem is not discharged by this local result.
  Proofs16ShortProduct refines these proper cells to lengths v-1 or v at
  their existing common difference, retains the recurrence estimate, and
  proves local final-coordinate linearity under the explicit scale budgets.
  Proofs16ShortScale verifies ceiling rounding above the singleton scale:
  v=ceil((zeta/2)*sqrt(s))+1 fits both v^2+1<=s and 2/s<=zeta/v.
  The extra unit supplies the length-minus-one budget for changing steps.
  Proofs16RecurrenceThreshold proves that the radius dominates the base
  polynomial threshold, and recovers the full simultaneous threshold from
  a recurrence root. A target width greater than one therefore supplies
  the threshold automatically. Its local-linearity theorem combines all
  these estimates with the product partition in positive base dimension.
  Proofs16SingletonPartition constructs proper singleton partitions and
  proves filtered linearity there. The local theorem now covers every m,
  including zero, without a separate above-one target hypothesis.
  Proofs16ProductGeometry recovers canonical factor carriers from every
  nonempty displayed product. Properness can therefore be inherited from
  the actual box rather than assumed for arbitrary factor presentations.
  Proofs16StepBounds lifts a progression contained in an initial interval
  of length n with 2*n<=N to its centered integer step, and proves
  centeredAbs(step)*(length-1)<=n-1. This supplies the residue-partition
  budget when such a short index model has been constructed.
  Proofs16OrientedPartitions proves that reversal preserves carriers and
  properness, then constructs residue partitions for signed modular steps.
  Properness and length at least two discharge the nonzero-step premise.
  Proofs16ProductTiling uses short containment of a base axis to partition
  its product with a sufficiently long unit-step final axis into proper
  common-step boxes. The resulting final axes have lengths v-1 or v and
  the box widths are at least v-1.
  Proofs16BoundedChunks partitions intervals and proper boxes into axes of
  lengths in [r,2*r), requiring only r<=width and preserving the parent step.
  Proofs16ShortParents takes r=floor(m/4), retaining width at least m/8 and
  making every axis short enough for the step estimate against a proper
  final axis of length at least m. These conclusions require m>=4.
  Proofs16RelativeSteps translates and divides by a unit parent step. It
  proves the relative-step bound and final-axis tiling in the original
  coordinates. In prime moduli, proper length at least two supplies the unit.
  Proofs16RetiledRecurrence applies Lemma 16.1 to the base alone, then tiles
  the final axis at each resulting step. It proves exact coverage and
  disjointness even when the intermediate product is not itself a box,
  and derives final-axis linearity from the frequency cover. Its above-one
  wrapper discharges the recurrence threshold and rounding budgets.
  Proofs16LocalizedCover applies MultiplyLinear to all preliminary cells,
  pads local graph families with zero functions to one natural count below
  the common real bound, and unites their good sets. Disjointness preserves
  the (1-sigma) mass bound and identifies each local good set inside its cell.
  Its short-parent wrapper retains the parent geometry and proves a uniform
  child width of at least (m/8)^a, where a is the multiple-linearity exponent.
  Proofs16LocalizationBudget bounds the combined localization and natural-
  floor loss by sixteen after taking the recurrence root. Ceiling rounding
  still reaches the original target width, with the extra unit of tiling
  slack and the Bohr budget, when zeta<=1/32.
  Proofs16LocalizedThreshold proves this radius bound and a factor-sixteen
  threshold margin. Its combined parameter theorem derives the preliminary
  scale, positive floored recurrence input, full recurrence threshold, and
  all short-cell budgets from the original above-one width target, assuming
  the multiple-linearity exponent lies in (0,1].
  Proofs16ProductAssembly unites the uniform cover, local retiled recurrence,
  and singleton branch into one product partition with the original target.
  Proofs16Lemma6Parameters establishes the actual theta1, delta, t, and
  exponent ranges, the exact square-root/printed-width identity, and the
  m<4 singleton bound. Proofs16Lemma6 then supplies the exact companion for
  the migrated catalogue statement, including proper output boxes.
  This is an explicit statement migration: the catalogue now assumes prime
  N (the paper's standing convention at TeX line 117), k>=1 (the induction
  range in Lemmas 16.3--16.4), and a proper input box, and requires proper
  output boxes. Its width and graph-count bounds are unchanged. The earlier
  unrestricted formal-width encoding is retained as the unproved definition
  lemma_16_6_unrestricted_box_encoding; it is not counted as a numbered proof.
  Source fidelity still needs a separate audit: the paper also requires
  axes to remain progressions in integer representatives. Box.IsProper alone
  allows wrapping and does not express that requirement. Closing the migrated
  companion does not by itself discharge that shared representation issue.

Constructive proof of the migrated Lemma 16.9
  Proofs16FibreGeometry identifies appendCoordinate with the canonical
  last-coordinate map, proves exact product cardinalities, transports good
  base-set density to products, and proves the intersection mass estimate.
  It also shows that every final-coordinate fibre of a multilinear function
  is globally affine and constructs global extensions of partial affine maps.
  Proofs16WidthMonotonicity proves that increasing a delta-side graph count
  only decreases the required Lemma 16.6 width, and verifies the exact
  composite exponent in Lemma 16.9 after the gamma-side partition.
  Proofs16FibreCovers recovers selected base and induced-domain membership
  from B1 and constructs the affine maps used by the final cover.
  Proofs16Lemma9 applies Lemma 16.6 in every initial cell, unifies the delta
  counts below their common real bound, and combines the two good sets with
  loss at most sigma. Adding the extended induced value to each multilinear
  fibre retains the separate gamma-side cover count. The resulting width is
  exactly the corrected catalogue width, not a weaker local substitute.
  The catalogue migration explicitly carries over prime N, k>=1, and proper
  input boxes. Section16LineCover now requires proper output boxes, and its
  all-box premise requires proper inputs. Earlier unrestricted encodings of
  both predicates and Lemma 16.9 are retained without asserted companions.
  The proved uniform wrapper supplies Section16AllBoxLineCovers, but does not
  resolve the documented quantitative gap in the remaining Lemma 16.10.

Two-anchor interpolation for Lemma 16.10
  Proofs16Interpolation proves multilinear closure under addition, scalar
  multiplication, and adding an unused final coordinate. It constructs the
  affine interpolant directly from the two slice values and proves agreement
  on any affine fibre domain containing the two distinct anchors.
  Two slice covers with p and q functions give p*q interpolants. With r
  sampled slices and q functions on each slice, a common base domain and
  two distinct anchors in each nonempty affine class suffice for r*r*q*q
  candidates, independently of the number of affine classes.
  This preserves the correlation between slope and intercept choices; it
  does not yet prove a stronger MultiplyLinear parameter or a final bound.
  The common base partition and synchronization with the final-coordinate
  progression are now constructed below. The final quantitative comparison
  in Lemma 16.10 remains outstanding.

Corrected distinct-anchor sampling estimate
  Proofs16DistinctSampling counts samples avoiding a subset exactly and
  bounds failure to hit two distinct class elements by missing one of two
  disjoint parts. Splitting a class of size c in an n-point space gives
  failure probability at most 2*((n-floor(c/2))/n)^r.
  For c>=2 and c>=sigma*n/q, the verified budget
  r=ceil(6*q/sigma^2) makes this failure probability at most sigma.
  This replaces the printed two-hit estimate; it is not an improved bound.
  A checked counterexample uses q=1, sigma=1/4, n=4, and c=1: the class
  meets the stated size threshold but its distinct-pair failure probability
  is one for all 16 draws, while the printed expression is below sigma.
  Proofs16SampleSelection now selects a single shared sample by a finite
  weighted average. Weights are class sizes, so the estimate controls lost
  points. Whole successful classes are retained, including their anchors.
  Proofs16ClassPruning deletes classes below sigma*n/q. If 2*q<=sigma*n,
  every nonempty surviving class has at least two elements. For q classes
  per base point with total mass at most |T|*n, pruning and sampling together
  discard at most 2*sigma*|T|*n points, in the sum-of-class-sizes formulation.
  Proofs16ClassDeletion now transports these counts to an actual good subset
  of the ambient product. Its intersection with each original class is the
  retained class; points outside the class family are preserved. Both sampled
  anchors remain in that good subset.
  Proofs16AffineClasses partitions overlapping graph covers into disjoint
  affine classes, including for a finite column space embedded into the field.
  Proofs16AnchoredFibres assembles graph assignment, pruning, shared sampling,
  ambient mass, and the two-anchor interpolation identity. It applies over a
  prime modulus and keeps the long-column and corrected sampling hypotheses.
  Proofs16ProductAnchors transports samples and good sets to actual products
  of finite base and column sets with exact cardinalities. Proofs16AnchoredCover
  attaches them to the sufficiently long cells of Section16LineCover, retaining
  its original exceptional set in the domain and its proper-box partition.
  Proofs16CommonSliceCover uses the existing finite-union theorem to obtain
  a single base partition and a common pool of p candidates for all r sampled
  slices. Anchored interpolation gives r*r*p*p global multilinear candidates
  per base cell, with the union theorem's explicit width and graph bounds.
  Proofs16ShortColumns now handles every nonempty column set: when it is too
  short for the two-anchor threshold, the same corrected sample budget can
  enumerate all its columns. Directly sampled points use slice candidates
  lifted constantly in the final variable; the long-column case uses paired
  interpolation. Their combined candidate count is r*p+r*r*p*p.
  Proofs16RecoveredSliceCover puts both cases on the common slice partition
  and intersects the sampling good set with the lifted good base domain.
  The resulting product good set loses at most the sum of those two losses.
  Proofs16SynchronizedCover retiles the final axis using the existing short
  parent geometry. It preserves both the candidate family and the good set.
  Proofs16SynchronizedSliceCover constructs the slice partition inside those
  short parents, so their hypotheses are supplied rather than assumed for an
  arbitrary refinement. If v^2+1 fits below the refined base width, every
  output box is proper and has width at least v-1.
  Proofs16LocalAffineLift assembles the complete local construction on a proper
  prime-modulus box with k>=1 and initial scale m>=4. The total loss is at most
  2*tau+epsilon, and the graph count remains r*p+r*r*p*p with p bounded by the
  sampled-slice union control. Its geometric output is a genuine box partition.
  Proofs16LiftWidth chooses v=floor(sqrt(w)/2)+1 when w>=16 and proves both
  v^2+1<=w and v-1>=sqrt(w)/4, accounting for the integer rounding explicitly.
  Here w=(m/8)^a and a=multipleC(epsilon/(r*s),gamma,k)^(r*s).
  Proofs16LiftAllScales establishes the local lift for every natural m,
  including zero. When w<16 it uses genuine singleton boxes and one graph
  per cell; its control-range proof verifies that the graph budget allows one.
  The output width is sqrt((m/8)^a)/4 and the loss remains 2*tau+epsilon.
  Proofs16FiniteCoverPadding reindexes arbitrary finite candidate types and
  pads them to a uniform natural count, preserving multilinearity and coverage.
  Proofs16GlobalAffineLift applies the local lift throughout Section16LineCover,
  flattens all proper box refinements, and intersects the original good set
  with the union of the new local good sets. The total loss is sigma+2*tau+epsilon.
  With b=multipleQ(epsilon/(r*s),gamma,k)^(r*s), the global graph count is at
  most r*b+r*r*b*b; the width remains sqrt((m/8)^a)/4 for m<=l.
  Proofs16GlobalLiftParameters pads the line-cover graph count to max(1,q),
  chooses r=ceil(6*max(1,q)/tau^2), and takes m=floor(l) for l>=0. This handles
  zero graph counts and removes the auxiliary integer choices from assembly.
  Proofs16ClosingComparison proves that the transcription's same-dimensional
  closing graph comparison is false throughout its stated positive range:
  for p>=1 and 0<gamma,rho<=1, Q(rho,gamma,k) < Q(rho/(4*p),gamma,k)^p.
  At gamma=rho=1 the analogous comparison also fails for arbitrary source
  and target dimensions. These results distinguish the edited formula from
  the original published formula; they do not refute Lemma 16.10 itself.
  The verified global lift therefore needs a different argument to attain
  the catalogue's prescribed controls. Proving the displayed comparison is
  not a remaining feasible arithmetic obligation: its reverse is now checked.
  The newly received gowers_interpolation_article.zip proposes sampling
  without replacement and singleton recovery for a sharper local bound. Its
  argument has been inspected, but is not a checked Lean result at this stage.

Shared Section 16 migration
  Box.IsProper is now a shared definition. MultiplyLinear requires proper
  input and output boxes and loss parameters in (0,1]. Former proper-only
  predicates are compatibility aliases of the shared definitions.
  Proofs16BoxGeometry proves that a proper box's width is bounded by every
  axis cardinality and by the modulus. It also proves the printed uncapped
  loss quantifier impossible: loss 2 would require a proper box in ZMod 2
  of width at least 4. The earlier inflated-singleton counterexample remains.
  This is an explicit repair of the printed definition, not a proof that its
  unrestricted loss quantifier is sound.
  The finite-union and finite-sum proofs now share one proper refinement
  engine. Lemma 16.8 and downward closure use the repaired shared predicate.
  The existing base-case construction now closes the catalogue's Lemma 16.3.

Completed Section 13 coefficient extraction
  Proofs13RowCoefficients proves translation of Freiman relations and recovery
  of both affine coefficients from two distinct column evaluations over a field.
  Proofs13RowSelection proves the cubic row-moment identity, the exact quadratic
  diagonal contribution, and selection of distinct columns from their difference.
  A mixed density estimate supplies the cubic moment; another theorem bounds
  the diagonal contribution. Proofs13CommonRows identifies this mass with the
  cardinality of the actual retained subset and chooses affine coefficients
  without assuming uniqueness on rows with fewer than two points.
  Proofs13CoefficientExtraction proves the migrated Lemma 13.8. Its input
  densities 2^-43*alpha^224 and 2^-48*alpha^256 give cubic coefficient
  2^-134*alpha^704; the stated width condition then yields output density
  2^-135*alpha^704. The zero-length Q case is handled separately.
  The generic theorem keeps the stronger lower bound
    m * (delta^2 * beta * |S| - 1)
  whenever it is positive, before weakening to the displayed half-size bound.
  This auxiliary improvement does not improve the final Szemeredi estimate.
  Fidelity repair: Stage137Data now records B contained in the original domain,
  as supplied by its construction from vertical edges. Lemma 13.8 explicitly
  assumes prime modulus, the paper's standing field hypothesis. The earlier
  IsStage137DataWithoutDomain, lemma_13_7_without_domain, and
  lemma_13_8_without_domain_assumptions encodings are preserved and unproved.
  Proofs13RowLinearization constructs the selected upper-endpoint set and
  derives its domain containment from the vertical-edge condition. Adding an
  affine base row and affine vertical difference gives each affine upper row;
  the slopes add (the printed calculation displays a minus sign at this step).
  The quantitative progression selection in Stage 13.7 remains open; these
  structural lemmas and the coefficient extraction do not discharge it.

Section 13.7 selection and remaining partition input
  Proofs13BaseRowSelection proves the exact sum over base heights, selects one
  base row preserving both Stage 13.6 edge-count bounds, and derives its original
  domain density. Proofs13PartitionSelection proves that a column partition
  partitions the selected upper endpoints and uses weighted averaging to retain
  both density bounds on one cell, without assuming equal cell sizes.
  The full Stage 13.7 conclusion is now proved conditional only on a suitably
  long affine partition of each dense base row. The original-domain Freiman
  property is inherited by restriction. Stage 13.6 forces the ambient progression
  to be nonempty; the case of empty critical heights is discharged separately.
  Lemma 13.7 remains open. Proofs07ModularPartition now transports the ceiling
  partition to proper modular progressions over a prime modulus, with nonzero
  cell steps and affine formulas in the original coordinate. The construction
  reuses the established one-dimensional box index transport.
  Proofs13LargeScaleExtraction identifies its exponent exactly with
  2^-100*alpha^448 and proves the full Stage 13.7 conclusion when
    4096*pi/(2^-43*alpha^224) <= R.length^(2^-100*alpha^448).
  The prime-modulus and scale hypotheses are explicit.
  Proofs07ShortLinearity proves affine extension on domains of size at most two
  and uses the order-two relation to prove affine linearity on any proper
  progression of length at most three. A partition into cells of length two or
  three then handles any target at most two, without a density threshold.
  Proofs13SmallScaleExtraction applies this to prove the full Stage 13.7
  conclusion when R.length^(2^-100*alpha^448) <= 2. The intermediate range
  between this bound and the large-scale threshold remains open; neither
  scale-qualified theorem is counted as a full numbered completion.

Constant-radius Bogolyubov--Freiman improvement
  Proofs07BohrHom proves lemma_7_8_constant_radius with the same spectrum
  cardinal bound 16*alpha^(-2), replacing alpha/(32*pi) by 1/(8*pi).
  The error is bounded by 3/8 of the actual fourth Fourier moment, whose
  zero-frequency contribution is positive. This proves nonvanishing of the
  fourfold correlation and supplies the same induced Freiman-2 map.
  The theorem works for arbitrary additive commutative target groups and
  positive density, retaining the exact density and Freiman-8 hypotheses.
  This improves an auxiliary radius; no improved final Szemeredi bound follows
  until the remaining extraction and density-increment obligations are proved.

Ceiling targets in Corollary 7.11
  Proofs07SimultaneousLinearity now exports the direct sufficient budget
    (1024*pi/alpha) * m^2 <= length^(3*e),
  where e = 2^-14 * alpha^2 / q. The original exact companion is derived from
  this construction without changing its catalogue statement or hypotheses.
  Proofs07CeilingPartition proves that length^e >= 4096*pi/alpha suffices to use
  m = ceil(length^e). Every cell then has length at least the full real-power
  target, preserving e and avoiding a floor loss. The common positive integer
  step, properness, partition, and simultaneous affine formulas are retained.
  This is an auxiliary partition improvement, not a new final Szemeredi bound.

New Section 18 infrastructure
  Proofs18IntervalTransfer:
    A modular progression with natural representatives at most n lifts to an
    ordinary progression when 2*n < N. Descending representatives are reversed.
    The interval-image wrapper gives a progression in the original natural set.
  Proofs18AffineTransfer:
    Proper progression indices are injective. Pullback and cyclic embedding
    cardinalities are exact. An index progression transports to a nonconstant
    progression in the old modulus, without a primality assumption there.
    Density in a new modulus M is (length/M) times density on the progression.
  Proofs18UniformInterval:
    Corollary 3.6 now supplies both an integer-interval uniform stopping case
    and a uniform stopping case in a fresh cyclic model of a proper progression.

Reproducible checks (from repository root)
  python3 Combinatorics/Ramsey/scripts/check_gowers.py GowersSzemeredi.Audit
  python3 Combinatorics/Ramsey/scripts/gowers_status.py

  The first command compiles local dependencies one at a time, uses existing
  Lake package caches, and checks the axioms of every public theorem under
  LeanProofs.GowersSzemeredi. Only propext, Classical.choice, and Quot.sound
  are allowed. It also audits conditional theorems; this does not discharge
  their hypotheses. The source inventory is deliberately a separate check.
  The build uses the repository's Lean 4.32.0 toolchain and pinned mathlib.

Next substantial obligations
  The JSON ledger is exhaustive; the sequence below highlights the main
  quantitative dependency chain. The qualitative Freiman theorems 7.1--7.2
  and the quadratic inverse theorem 8.2 also remain open.
  1. Resolve Corollary 5.8's missing common-target scale assumptions. Its
     scale-qualified repair is proved, but does not establish the unrepaired
     catalogue statement.
  2. Complete extraction stages 13.5--13.7 and 13.9; repaired Lemma 13.8 is proved.
     Corollary 13.10 requires compatibility and grid inputs; do not silently
     discharge them by citing the paper.
  3. Complete the higher-dimensional Section 16 induction using the migrated
     proper-box predicates, propagate properness through the remaining box
     statements, and resolve the documented Corollary 16.11 bound.
     Its one-dimensional base case, Lemma 16.3, and migrated Lemmas 16.6 and
     16.9 are now proved. Lemma 16.10 and the inductive extraction remain.
  4. Prove Theorem 18.1 with explicit thresholds strong enough for iteration.
     The existing Section 18 cyclic dichotomy is conditional on that theorem.
     Account for the epsilon/4 density increment and cell-size prefactor, and
     for density loss in the prime model. The new transfers address the
     combinatorial transport, not these quantitative estimates.
  5. Close Theorem 18.2 and its headline consequences; then investigate tighter
     final bounds without treating improved auxiliary statements as a proved
     improvement of the full Szemeredi estimate.
